A non-managing partner may not interfere in the company’s management.
However, said partner, or his designee, may, twice during the fiscal year, have access to the company’s operations, examine its records and documents, obtain a summary of the company’s financial status from such records and documents, and may offer his opinion to the company’s manager.
Any agreement to the contrary shall be deemed null and void.
If the manager is appointed as a managing partner in the company’s articles of incorporation, he may not be removed except pursuant to a unanimous decision issued by the other partners, and if he is appointed as such in a separate contract, he may be removed pursuant to a decision issued by the majority vote of partners, unless the company’s articles of incorporation stipulate otherwise.
If the manager is not a partner, whether appointed in the company’s articles of incorporation or in a separate contract, he may be removed pursuant to a decision issued by the majority vote of partners.
A manager appointed in the company’s articles of incorporation or in a separate contract, whether a partner or otherwise, may be removed from his position pursuant to a final judgment rendered by the competent judicial authority.
The removal of the manager shall not result in the dissolution of the company, unless stipulated in the company’s articles of incorporation.
A company’s manager, whether a partner or otherwise, shall have the right to resign, provided that he notifies the partners in writing at least 60 days prior to the effective date of his resignation, unless stipulated otherwise in the company’s articles of incorporation or in the appointment contract; otherwise, he shall be liable for any damage arising from his resignation.
The resignation of the manager shall not result in the dissolution of the company, unless stipulated in the company’s articles of incorporation.
The interests of partners may not be in the form of tradable sukuk.
A partner may not wholly or partly assign his interests unless such assignment is carried out pursuant to the conditions provided for in the company’s articles of incorporation or upon obtaining the approval of the other partners.
Any assignment agreement concluded to the contrary shall be deemed null and void.
Said assignment shall be registered with the Commercial Register and published therein.
A partner may assign to other parties the financial rights associated with his interests in the company, and the effect of such assignment shall be limited to the parties thereto.
If a new partner joins the company with a new contribution, he shall be personally and jointly liable with the other partners for the company’s past and future debts.
He may, however, be relieved from past debts if the other partners unanimously agree thereto. 
 Such agreement shall be valid against creditors from the date it is registered with the Commercial Register and published therein.
If a partner withdraws from the company or is removed therefrom, he shall not be liable for the debts incurred by the company following the registration of his withdrawal or removal with the Commercial Register and its publication therein. 
 He shall, however, remain liable for any debts incurred prior thereto, unless the other partners and the company’s creditors agree to relieve him from such debts.
If a partner assigns his interests, the assignee shall be liable to the company’s creditors for any debts incurred prior to becoming a partner or thereafter. 
 The assignor shall not be liable for the company’s debts toward its creditors unless they object to his relief from liability within 30 days after being notified by the company of such assignment. 
 In case of objection, the assignor shall be jointly and severally liable for the debts incurred prior to his assignment.
Unless the company’s articles of incorporation stipulate otherwise, a partner may unilaterally withdraw from the company, provided that he notifies the other partners at least 60 days prior to the date set for withdrawal.
The company’s articles of incorporation may provide for procedures for removal of partners.
If the articles of incorporation do not provide for such procedures, the majority of partners may petition the competent judicial authority to remove a partner, or more, from the company if there are valid grounds therefor. 
 In such case, the company shall continue to exist between the remaining partners.
A withdrawing partner, or the remaining partners in case a partner is removed from the company, shall register the withdrawal or removal with the Commercial Register and publish it therein. 
 Said withdrawal or removal shall not be valid against third parties except upon its registration and publication.
The competent judicial authority may, upon a petition by a partner, or more, issue a decision to dissolve the company if its continuation between the partners is not feasible.
Profits and losses and the interests of each partner therein shall be determined at the end of the company’s fiscal year pursuant to financial statements prepared in accordance with accounting standards approved in the Kingdom. 
 Upon determination of partners’ interests in the profits, each partner shall be deemed a creditor of the company to the extent of his interests, unless the company's articles of incorporation provide otherwise.
Any decrease in the company’s capital arising from losses shall be made up from the profits of subsequent years. 
 In any other case, a partner shall not be obliged to make up for any decrease in his interests in the capital due to losses without his consent.
A partner may not be required to use his property to satisfy a company’s debt unless the debt is established pursuant to a final judgment or enforcement document and the company fails to satisfy the debt after a debt satisfaction notice is provided thereto.
A partner shall, upon satisfaction of the company’s debt, have the right of recourse against the other partners for the amounts he pays on behalf of the partners in proportion to their respective interests.
Absent a specific agreement relating to the value of interests or a specific valuation method therefor in the company’s articles of incorporation, a partner’s interests shall be valuated pursuant to a report prepared by one or more accredited valuers upon his withdrawal or removal from the company, the initiation of any liquidation proceedings against him under the Bankruptcy Law, or upon his death and the decision of his heirs not to join the company. 
 Said report shall indicate the fair value of each partner’s interests in the company’s assets at the time of the event. 
 The partner or his heirs shall not have an interest in any future rights, unless such rights arise from transactions made prior to such event.
A partner’s interests in case of assignment shall be valuated according to the value agreed upon with the assignee, unless the company’s articles of incorporation provide otherwise.
A general partnership shall not terminate upon a partner’s death, interdiction, removal, or withdrawal, or upon the initiation of any liquidation proceedings under the Bankruptcy Law against such partner, unless the company’s articles of incorporation stipulate otherwise.
In such cases, the company shall continue to exist between the other partners and said partner or his heirs shall have only his interests in the company’s assets. 
 Said interests shall be determined pursuant to Article 49 of this Law.
The company’s articles of incorporation may stipulate that, in case of the death of a partner, the company may continue to exist with heirs interested in joining the company as partners, even if they are minors or prohibited by law from engaging in commercial activities. 
 If the company continues to exist, the partner’s heirs who are minors or prohibited by law from engaging in commercial activities shall not be liable for the company’s debts except to the extent of their respective inherited interests in the company’s capital.
In such case, the company shall, within a period not exceeding one year from the date of the partner’s death, be converted into a limited partnership, whereby such heirs who are minors or prohibited by law from engaging in commercial activities become limited partners; otherwise, the company shall be deemed terminated by force of law upon the lapse of said period, unless the heirs reach the age of majority or cease to be prohibited from engaging in commercial activities during said period, and wish to become general partners.
If only one partner remains in the company upon the death, interdiction, withdrawal, or removal of the other partners or upon the initiation of any liquidation proceedings against them under the Bankruptcy Law, said partner shall be given a period of 90 days to rectify the company’s status whether by the joining of another partner or the conversion of the company into another form of company provided for in this Law. 
 Otherwise, the company shall be deemed terminated by force of law upon the lapse of such period.
A limited partnership is a company that comprises two groups of partners, one group shall include at least one partner of a natural or legal personality who shall be jointly and personally liable for the company’s debts and liabilities, and the other group shall include at least one limited partner of a natural or legal personality who shall not be liable for the company’s debts and liabilities except to the extent of his interests in the company’s capital.
A limited partner shall not acquire the capacity of a merchant.
General partners in a limited partnership shall be subject to the provisions applicable to partners in a general partnership.
Absent a specific provision in this Part, a limited partnership shall be subject to the provisions of a general partnership.
A limited partner, or his designee, may, twice during the fiscal year, have access to the company’s operations, examine its records and documents, obtain a summary of the company’s financial status from such records and documents.
A limited partner may not interfere in the management of the company’s external activities, even with a power of attorney; otherwise, he shall be jointly and personally liable for the debts and liabilities the company incurs due to his interference.
A limited partner may, however, participate in the management of the company’s internal activities in accordance with its articles of incorporation. 
 The partner shall not be deemed liable for such participation, unless it leads third parties to believe that he is a general partner; in such case, he shall be deemed jointly and personally liable to such parties for the company’s debts and liabilities.
In a company’s articles of incorporation, general and limited partners may agree to have a general assembly and shall determine its powers and meeting procedures.
Unless stipulated otherwise in the company’s articles of incorporation, partner decisions shall be passed as follows:
Decisions amending the articles of incorporation shall be passed by the unanimous vote of general partners and the approval of limited partners owning majority interests in the capital.
Other decisions shall be passed by the majority vote of general partners.
A limited partner may not request the dissolution of the limited partnership nor may he vote on issues relating to the appointment or removal of its manager.
A limited partner may assign all or part of his interests to other partners in the company.
A limited partner may assign all or part of his interests to non-partners upon the approval of general partners and the limited partners owning majority interests in the capital, unless the company’s articles of incorporation stipulate otherwise.
A general partner may assign all or part of his interests to a limited partner or non-partner in accordance with paragraph (2) of this Article.
If a limited partner fails to provide his interests in the company’s capital on the due date prior to the assignment of said interests, the assignee shall be liable for providing the same.
General or limited partners may join a company upon the approval of all general partners; the approval of limited partners shall not be required, unless the company’s articles of incorporation stipulate otherwise.
A limited partnership shall not terminate upon a limited partner’s death, interdiction, withdrawal, insolvency, or upon the initiation of any liquidation proceedings under the Bankruptcy Law against such partner, unless the company’s articles of incorporation stipulate otherwise.
A joint-stock company is a company incorporated by one, or more, natural or legal persons and its capital is divided into tradable shares. 
 The company shall be solely liable for the debts and liabilities arising from its activities. 
 The liability of shareholders shall be limited to paying the value of the subscribed shares.
The issued capital of a joint-stock company shall not be less than five hundred thousand riyals and its paid-up capital upon incorporation shall not be less than a quarter of said capital.
A joint-stock company shall have issued capital representing subscribed shares and the company's articles of association may provide for authorized capital.
The company’s issued capital may, pursuant to a decision by the company’s board of directors, be increased within the limits of its authorized capital, provided that the issued capital is paid in full.
If incorporators do not limit the subscription of all of the company’s shares to themselves during the incorporation period, unsubscribed shares must be offered for subscription in accordance with the Capital Market Law.
The Ministry and the CMA may determine the rules, procedures, documents, and approvals necessary for the incorporation of a joint-stock company the shares of which are offered for public subscription during the incorporation period or listed in the capital market.
The paid-up value of subscribed shares shall be deposited with a bank licensed to operate in the Kingdom in an account in the name of the company under incorporation. 
 Disposition of such account shall be entrusted only to the board of directors following the company’s registration with the Commercial Register.
If the company is not registered with the Commercial Register, subscribers may recover the amounts they paid from the banks through which they subscribed. 
 In such case, the banks shall promptly refund such amounts to the subscribers, and incorporators shall be jointly and severally liable against subscribers for such obligation and for any due compensation. 
 Incorporators shall bear all of the expenses incurred in the incorporation of the company and shall be jointly and severally liable to third parties for their acts and dispositions during the incorporation period.
A company shall be deemed duly incorporated upon its registration with the Commercial Register. 
 Any lawsuit filed thereafter to invalidate the company for violation of the provisions of this Law or the provisions of the company’s articles of association shall not be heard.
If in-kind contributions are provided upon the incorporation of a company or upon the increase of its capital, said contributions shall be valuated by an accredited valuer, or more, who shall prepare a report indicating the fair value of the contributions. 
 Such report shall be presented to the incorporators or the extraordinary general assembly, as the case may be, for deliberation. 
 Providers of in-kind contributions may not vote on the decision related to said report. 
 If the incorporators or general assembly decide to reduce the value of in-kind contributions stated in the report, such reduction must be approved by the providers of said contributions.
The period between the issuance of the accredited valuer’s report on the fair value of in-kind contributions and the issuance of shares in exchange for said contributions shall not exceed the period specified in the Regulations.
A joint-stock company shall be managed by a board of directors comprising at least three members.
A shareholder may nominate himself or one or more shareholders for membership on the board of directors of a joint-stock company.
The ordinary general assembly shall elect the company’s board members. 
 In all cases, board members must be natural persons.
The Regulations shall specify the voting method for electing board members in a joint-stock company.
The company's articles of association may specify the method of forming the board of directors, subject to the rules set out in the Regulations.
The company's articles of association shall determine the term of the board of directors, provided it does not exceed four years. 
 Board members may be re-elected, unless the company's articles of association provide otherwise.
The company’s articles of association shall determine membership expiration or termination upon the board’s request. 
 The ordinary general assembly may, however, remove some or all board members even if the company’s articles of association stipulate otherwise. 
 In such case, the ordinary general assembly shall elect a new board of directors or a replacement for removed members, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of this Law.
The Competent Authority may specify the rules governing the removal of board members by the ordinary general assembly.
The board of directors shall call the ordinary general assembly to convene in ample time prior to the expiration of the board’s term to elect a board of directors for a new term.
If the election cannot be held and the term of the current board expires, its members shall continue to carry out their duties until a board of directors is elected for a new term, provided that they do not continue to carry out their duties beyond the period specified in the Regulations.
If the chairman and members of the board of directors resign, they shall call for an ordinary general assembly meeting to elect a new board. 
 The resignation shall not take effect until a new board is elected, provided that the resigning board does not continue to carry out its duties beyond the period specified in the Regulations.
A board member may resign pursuant to a written notice submitted to the chairman of the board of directors. 
 If the chairman of the board resigns, the notice shall be submitted to the board members and the board’s secretary. 
 In both cases, the resignation shall take effect from the date specified in the notice.
Unless the company’s articles of association stipulate otherwise, if the position of a board member of a joint-stock company becomes vacant due to his death or resignation, and if the minimum number of members required for the validity of board meetings as stipulated in this Law or the company’s articles of association is not affected by such vacancy, the board may appoint a qualified person with relevant expertise to provisionally fill the vacancy. 
 The appointment shall be reported to the Commercial Register, and to the CMA if the company is listed in the capital market, within 15 days from the date of such appointment, and it shall be submitted to the ordinary general assembly in its first meeting. 
 The appointed member shall complete the term of his predecessor.
If the number of board members falls below the minimum number required for the validity of board meetings as stipulated in this Law or the company’s articles of association, the remaining members shall call for an ordinary general assembly meeting within 60 days to elect the required number of members.
If the board of directors is not elected for a new term or if the required number of board members is not satisfied, in accordance with paragraphs (1), (2), and (5) of this Article, any person with interest may petition the competent judicial authority to appoint qualified persons with expertise, in any number it deems appropriate, to supervise the management of the company and call on the general assembly to convene within 90 days to elect a new board of directors or appoint board members to satisfy the required number, as the case may be, or may petition the competent judicial authority to dissolve the company.
The general assembly may, upon the recommendation of the board of directors, terminate the membership of any member who fails to attend three consecutive meetings or five non-consecutive meetings during the course of his membership without an excuse acceptable to the board.
Subject to the provision of Article 27 of this Law, a board member shall immediately disclose to the board of directors any direct or indirect interest he may have in company transactions or contracts. 
 Such disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of the board meeting.
Said member may not vote on a decision by the board of directors and the general assemblies relating to such transactions and contracts.
The board shall notify the general assembly, when it convenes, of the transactions and contracts in which such board member has direct or indirect interest; the notice shall be accompanied with a special report prepared by the company auditor in accordance with auditing standards approved in the Kingdom.
If a board member fails to disclose his interest as provided for in paragraph (1) of this Article, the company or any person with interest may petition the competent judicial authority to invalidate the contract or obligate the member to return any profit or benefit realized therefrom.
Liability for damages arising from the transactions and contracts referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article shall be borne by the board member having interest in such transactions or contracts; liability shall also be borne by other board members for their omission or negligence in the performance of their duties in violation of said paragraph, or if it is established that the transactions and contracts are unfair or involve a conflict of interest and shareholders sustain damage therefrom.
Board members who object to the decision shall not be liable if their objection is explicitly recorded in the meeting minutes. 
 Absence from the meeting at which the decision is issued shall not exempt the absentee from liability, unless it is established that he was not aware of the decision or was unable to object to it after becoming aware thereof.
A joint-stock company may not grant any type of loan to its board members nor may it act as a guarantor or provide guarantees for any loans they conclude with a third party.
This shall apply to any loan or guarantee provided to any of their relatives.
Any contract concluded in violation of this provision shall be deemed null and void.
The company may petition the competent judicial authority for compensation from the violator for any damage sustained thereby.
Paragraph (1) of this Article shall not apply to the following:
Banks and other financing companies, which may, within their purposes and subject to the terms and conditions applicable to their transactions with clients, grant loans or extend credit to their board members, or provide guarantees for loans they conclude with third parties.
Loans and guarantees granted by the company in accordance with its employee incentive programs which are approved in accordance with the company’s articles of association or pursuant to a decision by the general assembly.
The Competent Authority may determine the rules and cases in which the company is prohibited from granting a loan or guarantee to its shareholders.
A shareholder may monitor the board of directors in accordance with the provisions of this Law. However, he may not interfere with the work of the board of directors nor the work of the company’s executive management, unless he is a member of its board of directors or is part of its executive management, or such interference is made through the general assembly in accordance with its powers.
The board of directors may conclude loans, regardless of their term; sell or pledge the company’s assets or place of business; or relieve the company’s debtors from their liabilities, unless its powers to carry out the same are restricted by the company’s articles of association or a general assembly decision.
The board of directors must obtain the approval of the general assembly for the sale of company assets the value of which exceeds 50% of the value of its total assets, whether the sale is made through one transaction, or more. 
 In such case, the transaction which leads to the sale of more than 50% of the value of assets shall require the general assembly’s approval. 
 Said percentage shall be calculated from the date the first transaction is concluded within the previous 12 months.
The Competent Authority may exclude certain acts and dispositions from the provisions of this Article.
The company’s articles of association shall determine remuneration of board members. 
 Such remuneration may be a fixed amount, an allowance for attending meetings, in-kind benefits, a percentage of the net profit, or a combination of two or more of the above. 
 The company’s articles of association may also set the maximum amount of remuneration, and the ordinary general assembly shall determine such amount, provided that it is fair, incentivizing, and commensurate with the performance of the member and the company.
The Regulations shall specify the rules necessary for the implementation of this paragraph.
The report submitted by the board of directors to the ordinary general assembly at its annual meeting shall include a detailed account of all the amounts board members received or were entitled to receive during the fiscal year in the form of remuneration, meeting allowances, expense allowances, and other benefits.
The report shall also include an account of the amounts received by board members in their capacity as employees or executives, or in exchange for technical, administrative, or consulting services as well as an account of the number of board meetings and the number of meetings attended by each member.
Without prejudice to the powers of the general assembly, the board of directors shall have all the powers necessary to manage the company and achieve its purposes, except for the acts or dispositions falling within the powers of the general assembly which are excluded pursuant to a special provision in this Law or the company’s articles of association.
The board of directors may also, within its powers, delegate one or more of its members or others to carry out certain acts.
The company shall be bound by all of the acts and dispositions performed in its name by the board of directors, even if said acts and dispositions are beyond the powers of the board, unless such acts and dispositions involve a party who acts in bad faith or a party who knows that such acts are beyond the powers of the board.
Subject to the company’s articles of association, the board of directors of a joint-stock company shall, at its first meeting, appoint a chairman from among its members, and it may appoint a managing director or chief executive officer from among its members.
The company’s articles of association shall specify their powers and duties.
If the articles of association do not provide for the assignment of powers, such powers shall be assigned by the board of directors.
The board of directors of a joint-stock company listed in the capital market shall, at its first meeting, appoint a vice-chairman from among its members.
An unlisted joint-stock company may appoint a vice-chairman.
The board of directors of a joint-stock company shall appoint a chief executive officer from among its members or others. 
 It shall determine his powers and remuneration if the company’s articles of association do not provide therefor.
The board of directors of a joint-stock company shall appoint a board secretary from among its members or others. 
 The board of directors shall determine his duties and remuneration if the company’s articles of association do not provide therefor.
The board of directors may remove the chairman, vice-chairman, managing director, chief executive officer, and board secretary, or any of them, from their positions. 
 However, this shall not result in the termination of their board membership.
Without prejudice to the powers of the board of directors set forth in this Law and the company’s articles of association, the chairman of the board of directors of a joint-stock company shall represent it before the judiciary, arbitration tribunals, and other parties. 
 The company's articles of association may stipulate that the managing director or chief executive officer has the power to represent the company; either of them may delegate others to represent the company.
The chairman of the board of directors of a joint-stock company may, pursuant to a written decision, delegate certain powers to other board members or to others to carry out certain acts, unless the company's articles of association stipulate otherwise.
If the board of directors has a vice-chairman, he shall assume the chairman’s duties in his absence.
The board of directors of a joint-stock company shall convene at least four times a year upon a call by its chairman, as stipulated in the company’s articles of association. 
 The Competent Authority may amend the minimum number of meetings provided for in this paragraph.
The chairman shall call for a board meeting to discuss one or more matters if requested in writing by a board member.
Board meetings shall only be valid if attended by at least half of the members, whether in person or by proxy, unless the company’s articles of association stipulate a higher percentage.
Board decisions shall be passed by the majority vote of attending members, whether in person or by proxy, and the chairman of the meeting shall, in case of a tie, have the casting vote, unless the company’s articles of association stipulate otherwise.
The board of directors shall determine the location of its meetings, and may hold its meetings through means of technology.
A member of the board of directors of a joint-stock company may not attend meetings nor vote on board decisions by proxy.
As an exception, he may designate another board member to act as his proxy if stipulated in the company’s articles of association, provided that the designated member does not act as proxy for more than one member.
A board decision shall become effective on the date of its issuance, unless the decision provides for a specific date or condition for its effectiveness.
The board of directors of a joint-stock company may issue decisions on urgent matters by circulation to all members, unless a member submits a written request for a board meeting to deliberate such matters.
The decisions shall be passed by the majority vote of members, unless the company's articles of association stipulate a higher percentage or number.
Such decisions shall be presented to the board of directors at its subsequent meeting to be recorded in the minutes of said meeting.
Deliberations and decisions of the board of directors of a joint-stock company shall be recorded in minutes prepared by the board secretary and signed by the meeting chairman, attending board members, and board secretary.
The minutes shall be recorded in a special register signed by the chairman of the board and board secretary.
Means of technology may be used to obtain signatures, record deliberations and decisions, and prepare meeting minutes.
Shareholder general assembly meetings shall be chaired by the chairman of the board of directors, the vice-chairman in case of the chairman’s absence, or any member designated by the board of directors in the absence of both the chairman and vice-chairman. 
 If none of the above is possible, the shareholders shall vote to designate a board member or any other person to chair the general assembly meeting.
A shareholder shall have the right to attend general assembly meetings even if the company’s articles of association stipulate otherwise. 
 A shareholder may delegate a person other than a board member to attend such meetings on his behalf.
Means of technology may be used to hold general assembly meetings and enable shareholders to engage in deliberations and vote on decisions.
The extraordinary general assembly may, in addition to the powers prescribed thereto in this Law, issue decisions on matters falling within the powers of the ordinary general assembly, subject to the same terms and conditions applicable to the ordinary general assembly.
The ordinary general assembly shall hold its annual meeting at least once during the six-month period following the end of the company’s fiscal year.
Other ordinary general assembly meetings may be held as necessary.
The agenda of the annual meeting of the ordinary general assembly shall include the following items:
Reviewing and discussing the board of directors’ report for the ending fiscal year.
Reviewing the financial statements of the ending fiscal year.
Reviewing the auditor's report for the ending fiscal year, if any, and making a decision thereon.
Deciding on board proposals relating to the distribution of dividends, if any.
The condition for holding the annual meeting of the ordinary general assembly shall be deemed satisfied if an extraordinary general assembly convenes during the six-month period following the end of the company’s fiscal year if its agenda includes the items stated in paragraph (2) of this Article.
If a decision issued by the ordinary general assembly involves amending the rights of a certain class of shareholders, said decision shall not take effect unless approved by the shareholders of such class having voting rights at a special assembly meeting convened in accordance with the provisions applicable to the extraordinary general assembly and the issuance of its decisions.
General and special assemblies shall convene upon a call by the board of directors, in accordance with the conditions stipulated in the company’s articles of association.
The board of directors shall call for an ordinary general assembly meeting within 30 days if requested by the auditor or by a shareholder, or more, representing at least 10% of the company’s voting shares. 
 If the board fails to call for a general assembly meeting within 30 days from the date of the auditor’s request, the auditor may call for such meeting.
The request referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article shall indicate the items on which shareholders are required to vote.
The Competent Authority may call for an ordinary general assembly meeting in the following cases:
If the period specified for the ordinary general assembly meeting, as provided for in Article 88(1), lapses without holding a meeting.
If it is established that the provisions of this Law or the company’s articles of association are violated or that there is a fault in the company’s management, including cases in which the number of board members falls below the minimum number required for the validity of board meetings.
If the board of directors fails to call for an ordinary general assembly meeting within the period specified in paragraph (1) of this Article from the date of the auditor’s request or the request of a shareholder, or more, representing at least 10% of the company’s voting shares.
The Competent Authority may take the measures necessary for holding the ordinary general assembly and it may chair the assembly meeting if the meeting cannot be chaired in accordance with Article 84(1) of this Law.
The call for an assembly meeting shall be made at least 21 days prior to the date set for the meeting in accordance with the rules specified in the Regulations, provided that:
shareholders are notified of the meeting by registered mail sent to the addresses registered in the shareholders’ register, or by an announcement using means of technology; and
a copy of the invitation and the meeting agenda are sent to the Commercial Register, and to the CMA if the company is listed in the capital market at the time of the announcement.
The invitation for the assembly meeting shall include at least the following:
A statement defining those with the right to attend the meeting and their right to designate persons other than board members to act as their proxy; a statement of a shareholder’s right to discuss items on the meeting agenda and direct questions as well as the manner of exercising the right to vote.
Meeting venue, date, and time.
Type of assembly, whether general or special.
Meeting agenda, including the items on which shareholders are required to vote.
Shareholders of an unlisted joint-stock company representing all of the company’s voting shares may hold a general assembly meeting without adhering to the conditions and periods prescribed for calling for meetings to review matters the decisions on which fall within the powers of the general assembly.
An ordinary general assembly meeting shall be deemed valid only if attended by shareholders who represent at least a quarter of the company’s voting shares, unless the company’s articles of association stipulate a higher percentage, provided that such percentage does not exceed half of the voting shares.
If the quorum required for an ordinary general assembly meeting is not satisfied as stipulated in paragraph (1) of this Article, a call shall be made for a second meeting to be held under the same conditions stipulated in Article 91 of this Law within 30 days following the date set for the first meeting.
The second meeting may be held one hour after the end of the period set for the first meeting, provided this is permitted by the company’s articles of association and the invitation for the first meeting provides for the possibility of holding a second meeting.
In all cases, the second meeting shall be deemed valid regardless of the number of voting shares represented therein.
Decisions of an ordinary general assembly meeting shall be passed by the majority vote of voting rights represented therein.
An extraordinary general assembly meeting shall be deemed valid only if attended by shareholders who represent at least half of the company’s voting shares, unless the company’s articles of association stipulate a higher percentage, provided that such percentage does not exceed two thirds of the voting shares.
If the quorum required for an extraordinary general assembly meeting is not satisfied as stipulated in paragraph (1) of this Article, a call shall be made for a second meeting to be held under the same conditions stipulated in Article 91 of this Law. 
 The second meeting may be held one hour after the end of the period set for the first meeting, provided that the invitation for the first meeting provides for the possibility of holding a second meeting.
In all cases, the second meeting shall be deemed valid if attended by shareholders who represent at least a quarter of the company’s voting shares.
If the quorum required for the second meeting is not satisfied, a call shall be made for a third meeting to be held under the same conditions stipulated in Article 91 of this Law. 
 The third meeting shall be deemed valid regardless of the number of voting shares represented therein.
Decisions of an extraordinary general assembly meeting shall be passed by the vote of two-thirds of the voting shares represented therein. 
 Decisions relating to the increase or decrease of capital, extension of the company’s term, dissolution of the company prior to the expiry of the term specified in its articles of association, merger of the company with another company, or division of the company into two companies or more shall be deemed valid only if made by the vote of three-quarters of the voting shares represented in the meeting.
Decisions of the extraordinary general assembly which are required to be registered with the Commercial Register as prescribed by the Regulations shall be registered therewith by the board of directors within 15 days from their issuance date.
Decisions of a joint-stock company’s general assembly shall become effective from the date of their issuance, unless this Law, the company’s articles of association, or said decisions stipulate a specific date or condition for their effectiveness.
The company’s articles of association shall determine the voting method in shareholder assemblies.
Members of the board of directors may not vote on assembly decisions relating to transactions and contracts in which they have direct or indirect interest or which involve a conflict of interest.
The board of directors shall, when preparing the agenda of the general assembly, take into consideration the matters that shareholders wish to include.
A shareholder, or more, representing at least 10% of the company's voting shares may add an item, or more, to the agenda during its preparation; the Competent Authority may amend said percentage.
The board of directors shall list each matter included in the general assembly’s agenda as an independent item. 
 The board shall not combine fundamentally distinct matters under one item, nor shall it include under one item the transactions and contracts in which any board member has a direct or indirect interest for the purpose of voting on the whole item.
Any shareholder may discuss the items included on the agenda of the general assembly and direct related questions to board members and the auditor.
Any provision to the contrary in the company’s articles of association shall be deemed null and void.
The board of directors or the auditor shall answer the questions of shareholders to the extent that does not undermine the company’s interests.
If a shareholder is not satisfied with the response to his question, he may request the general assembly to decide thereon and its decision shall be final.
Minutes of assembly meetings shall indicate the number of shareholders in attendance, whether in person or by proxy; the number of shares held by each attendee, whether personally or by proxy; the number of votes designated thereto; the decisions made; the number of consenting and dissenting votes; and a summary of meeting discussions.
The minutes shall be recorded after every meeting in a special register and signed by the assembly’s chairman and secretary and by the vote counters. 
 The Competent Authority may set rules for the minutes of assembly meetings and the duties of assembly secretaries and vote counters.
If a joint-stock company is incorporated by a single person, or if all of its shares are transferred to a single person, said person shall have the powers and authorities of shareholder assemblies stipulated in this Part and his decisions shall be issued in writing without the need to call for a meeting of the general assembly. 
 Such decisions shall be recorded in the special register referred to in Article 97 of this Law.
Without prejudice to the rights of bona fide third parties, any shareholder may petition the competent judicial authority to invalidate a decision issued by the shareholder assembly in violation of the provisions of this Law or the company’s articles of association if the shareholder objects to said decision during the meeting or if he does not attend the meeting for a valid reason. 
 A lawsuit filed for invalidation shall not be heard after the lapse of 90 days from the date the decision is issued.
To file the lawsuit referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article, the plaintiff must be a shareholder in the company upon filing the lawsuit and throughout its proceedings.
The articles of association of an unlisted joint-stock company may grant the chairman of the board of directors the power to propose the issuance of a general assembly decision by circulation among shareholders, unless shareholders request in writing that a meeting be held for deliberation.
However, the general assembly must convene in accordance with relevant provisions in cases related to the election and removal of board members and the appointment and removal of an auditor, if any, as well as cases requiring the review of the financial statements of the ending fiscal year.
The decision proposed to be issued in accordance with paragraph (1) of this Article shall be deemed valid if the company sends to all shareholders said decision along with the relevant documents, the instructions to be followed to approve the decision, and the date set for its issuance.
The issuance of general assembly decisions of unlisted joint-stock companies by circulation shall be as follows:
Decisions falling within the powers of the ordinary general assembly shall be passed if approved by one shareholder, or more, representing the majority of voting rights, unless the company’s articles of association provide for a higher percentage.
Decisions falling within the powers of the extraordinary general assembly shall be passed if approved by one shareholder, or more, representing at least 75% of voting rights, unless the company’s articles of association provide for a higher percentage.
General assembly decisions issued by circulation in accordance with paragraph (1) of this Article shall be recorded in minutes and entered in the special register referred to in Article 97 of this Law.
A shareholder, or more, representing at least 5% of the company’s capital may petition the competent judicial authority to order the inspection of the company if the conduct of the members of the board of directors or the auditor in relation to company affairs raises suspicion.
The competent judicial authority may, after hearing the statements of board members and the auditor, order the inspection of the company at the expense of the petitioner and may, if necessary, order the petitioner to provide a guarantee if requested by the company.
If the competent judicial authority determines the validity of the complaint, it may order any precautionary measures it deems fit and may call the general assembly to make the necessary decisions. 
 It may also remove board members and the auditor, and appoint qualified persons with expertise in any number it deems appropriate to supervise the management of the company and to call for a general assembly meeting to elect a new board of directors.
The competent judicial authority shall determine the powers and term of said persons.
The shares of a joint-stock company shall be nominal and indivisible against the company. 
 If a share is owned by several persons, they shall choose one person from among themselves to represent them in the use of rights related thereto. 
 Said persons shall be jointly and severally liable for obligations arising from the ownership of such share.
The company's articles of association shall specify the nominal value of its shares; shares of the same type or class shall be of equal nominal value.
Subject to paragraph (2) of this Article, shares may be divided into shares of a lower nominal value or merged in order to become shares of a higher nominal value. 
 The Competent Authority may set the rules necessary therefor.
An unlisted joint-stock company shall issue a paper or electronic certificate establishing the shareholder's ownership of the share.