Subscription in shares or ownership thereof shall imply that the shareholder accepts the company’s articles of association and abides by the decisions issued by shareholder assemblies in accordance with the provisions of this Law and the company’s articles of association, whether he is present or absent, and whether he approves or objects to such decisions.
Company shares shall be issued against cash or in-kind contributions.
The paid amount of the value of shares issued against cash contributions shall not be less than one quarter of the nominal value of said shares as specified in the company’s articles of association. 
 The paper or electronic share certificate of an unlisted joint-stock company shall indicate the paid amount of the value of shares.
In all cases, the remaining amount shall be paid within five years from the date on which the shares are issued.
Shares representing in-kind contributions shall be issued upon payment of their full value; they may not be delivered to their holders until ownership of such contributions is transferred to the company in full.
Shares may not be issued for less than their nominal value. 
 However, they may be issued for more than their nominal value if provided for in the company’s articles of association or if approved by the extraordinary general assembly; in such case, the difference in value shall be added in a separate item as part of the shareholders’ rights, and the Regulations shall specify its terms of use.
A shareholder shall, in accordance with the terms and conditions provided for in this Law or the company’s articles of association, have all of the rights associated with shares, including disposition of shares; attending shareholder assemblies, participating in their deliberations, and voting on their decisions; receiving dividends; electing board members; having access to the company’s records and documents without prejudice to the confidentiality of information; monitoring board activities; initiating derivative actions against board members; challenging the validity of shareholder assembly decisions; and receiving a share of the company’s assets upon liquidation.
The types of shares that a company may issue shall be as follows: common, preferred, and redeemable.
The company's articles of association may provide for different classes of share types and may grant certain rights or privileges to certain classes or set restrictions thereon.
Shares of the same type or class shall have equal rights and obligations. 
 Each type or class of shares shall have the rights associated therewith as stipulated in the company's articles of association.
The Regulations shall specify rules for the types and classes of shares that may be issued.
If the company has shares of different types or classes, it may convert one type or class into another type or class if provided for in the company’s articles of association.
To convert a type or class of shares into another type or class, the approval of the extraordinary general assembly must be obtained, except for cases in which the decision to issue shares stipulates that they are automatically converted into another type or class upon satisfying certain conditions or upon the lapse of a specified period.
The provisions provided for in Article 110 of this Law shall apply to cases in which the conversion of shares requires the amendment or cancellation of the rights or obligations associated with a type or class of shares.
Common and preferred shares and their classes may not be converted into redeemable shares or any classes thereof except with the approval of all shareholders of the company.
The Regulations shall determine the implementing rules of this Article and the manner in which the effects, rights, and obligations of shares are managed prior to conversion or thereafter.
If company shares are of different types and classes or if the company’s articles of association allow for the issuance of different types and classes of shares, the amendment or cancellation of any of the rights, obligations, or restrictions associated with said shares; the conversion of any type or class of shares into another type or class, if such conversion results in the amendment or cancellation of the rights or obligations associated with the type or class of shares to be converted; or the issuance of shares of a particular type or class that would prejudice the rights of another class of shareholders, shall require the approval of a special assembly composed, in accordance with Article 89 of this Law, of shareholders who are prejudiced by such amendment, cancellation, conversion, or issuance as well as the approval of the extraordinary general assembly.
If company shares include preferred or redeemable shares, new shares with priority over any of their classes may not be issued except with the approval of a special assembly composed, in accordance with Article 89 of this Law, of shareholders who are prejudiced by such issuance.
The CMA may set restrictions on the trading of shares of joint-stock companies that intend to be listed in the capital market.
The company’s articles of association may provide for restrictions on the trading of shares, including the right of shareholders to request redemption of shares, provided that such restrictions do not lead to a permanent ban on the trading of shares.
An unlisted joint-stock company shall prepare a special register which includes shareholders’ names, nationalities, particulars, places of residence, and occupations as well as the number of shares owned by each shareholder, their serial numbers, and the amount paid of their value. 
 The company may outsource the preparation of the register; said register shall be maintained in the Kingdom.
The company shall provide the Commercial Register with the information referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article and any amendment thereto within 15 days from the date of the company’s registration with the Commercial Register or from the date of the amendment, as the case may be.
Without prejudice to the Capital Market Law, the company’s articles of association may, upon the approval of shareholders representing at least 90% of the company’s voting shares, provide for the following:
Majority shareholders shall have the right to obligate minority shareholders to accept an offer from a bona fide buyer to purchase all of the company’s shares for the same price and under the same terms and conditions applicable to the purchase of majority shares.
In cases where the majority sell their shares, minority shareholders shall have the right to obligate majority shareholders to guarantee the sale of minority shares for the same price and under the same terms and conditions applicable to the sale of majority shares.
The company may purchase its own shares or accept them as a pledge if permitted under its articles of association. 
 Shares purchased by the company shall have no voting rights in shareholder assemblies.
Shares may be pledged and the pledgee may receive dividends and exercise share-related rights, unless the pledge agreement stipulates otherwise.
The pledgee may not attend shareholder assembly meetings nor vote therein.
The Regulations shall specify the rules necessary for the implementation of the provisions of this Article.
A shareholder shall pay the remaining amount of the value of the share on the designated dates. 
 In case of non-payment, the board of directors may, after notifying the shareholder in the manner prescribed in the company’s articles of association or by registered mail or through any means of technology, sell the share at a public auction or in the capital market, as the case may be.
The company's articles of association may grant other shareholders a preemptive right to purchase the shares of the non-paying shareholder.
The company shall receive the amounts due thereto from the sale proceeds and shall return any remaining amount to the shareholder.
If the sale proceeds are not sufficient to satisfy the due amounts, the company may satisfy such amounts from the shareholder’s property.
Rights associated with shares the value of which is not paid by the due date shall be suspended until such shares are sold or the due amount is paid in accordance with the provision of paragraph (1) of this Article; such rights include the right to receive dividends and attend shareholder assemblies and vote on their decisions.
However, the non-paying shareholder may, up to the date of sale, pay the due amount, in addition to any related expenses incurred by the company; in such case, he shall have the right to demand payment of dividends.
The company shall cancel the certificate of the share sold in accordance with the provisions of this Article and shall provide the buyer with a new certificate bearing the serial number of the canceled certificate. 
 The sale shall be recorded in the shareholders register along with the particulars of the new holder.
The company may not demand a shareholder to pay any amount other than the amount determined upon the issuance of the share, even if provided for in the company’s articles of association.
A joint-stock company may, in accordance with the Capital Market Law, issue negotiable debt instruments or financing sukuk.
For a company to issue debt instruments or financing sukuk that are convertible into shares, the extraordinary general assembly must issue a decision to determine the maximum number of shares that may be issued against such instruments or sukuk, whether they are issued at the same time, consecutively, or under one or more issuing schemes.
The board of directors shall, without the need for a new approval from the assembly, issue new shares against such instruments or sukuk upon the satisfaction of the conditions for their conversion into shares or the lapse of the period set for such conversion, or, in case of instruments or sukuk the conversion of which requires the submission of a conversion request by their holders, upon the lapse of the period specified for such request. 
 The board of directors shall take the necessary measures to amend the company’s articles of association with regard to the number of issued shares and the company’s capital.
The board of directors must register the completion of procedures of each capital increase with the Commercial Register.
The company may convert debt instruments or financing sukuk into shares in accordance with the Capital Market Law upon the approval of their holders, whether such approval is provided as part of the issuance conditions or pursuant to a subsequent agreement.
A person with interest may petition the competent judicial authority to invalidate any action in violation of the provisions of Articles 117 or 118 of this Law, and to compensate the holders of debt instruments or financing sukuk for any sustained damage.
Decisions of shareholder assemblies shall apply to holders of debt instruments and financing sukuk.
However, said assemblies may not amend the rights established for such holders unless they approve the amendments in a special assembly held thereby in accordance with the provisions of Article 89 of this Law.
The board of directors shall, at the end of the company’s fiscal year, prepare the company’s financial statements as well as a report on its activities and financial position for the ending fiscal year. 
 Said report shall include a proposal on the manner of distributing dividends.
The board shall make such documents available to the auditor, if any, at least 45 days prior to the date set for the annual ordinary general assembly meeting.
The documents referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article shall be signed by the chairman of the company’s board of directors and its chief executive officer as well as by its chief financial officer, if any. 
 Copies of such documents shall be maintained at the company’s headquarters and made available to shareholders.
The chairman of the board of directors shall provide shareholders with the company’s financial statements and the board’s report after signing the same, as well as the auditor’s report, if any, unless they are published using any means of technology, at least 21 days prior to the date set for the annual ordinary general assembly meeting. 
 The chairman of the board shall also deposit such documents in accordance with the Regulations.
The company’s articles of association may provide for setting aside a certain percentage of the net profit to create a reserve allocated for purposes specified in the articles of association.
The Competent Authority may set rules for creating such reserves.
The ordinary general assembly may, when determining dividends from the net profit, decide to create other reserves to serve the company’s interest or ensure the distribution of fixed dividends, as feasible, to the shareholders.
Said assembly may allocate amounts from the net profit for social objectives that benefit the company’s staff.
The reserve allocated for specific purposes in the company’s articles of association may not be used except pursuant to a decision by the extraordinary general assembly.
If such reserve is not allocated for a specific purpose, the ordinary general assembly may, upon a recommendation by the board of directors, decide to use the reserve for the benefit of the company or the shareholders. 
 The Competent Authority may set the rules for using such reserves.
The ordinary general assembly may use retained earnings and distributable reserves to pay the remaining value of the share or part thereof, provided fairness among shareholders is observed in accordance with the provisions of this Law.
The general assembly shall determine the percentage of the net profit to be distributed to the shareholders after deducting the reserves, if any.
A shareholder shall be entitled to dividends pursuant to a decision issued by the general assembly. 
 The decision shall indicate eligibility and distribution dates.
Shareholders registered in the shareholders’ register by the end of the eligibility date shall be eligible to receive dividends.
The Regulations shall determine the maximum period during which the board of directors shall implement the general assembly’s decision regarding the distribution of dividends to shareholders.
Capital shall be increased by any of the following methods:
Issuing new shares against cash or in-kind contributions.
Issuing new shares against company debts which are due and of a specific amount, subject to the consent of relevant creditors.
The issuance of such shares shall be made at the value determined by the extraordinary general assembly after obtaining the opinion of one or more experts or accredited valuers and after the issuance of a statement by the board of directors indicating the origin and amount of company debts. 
 Such statement shall be signed by the members of the board of directors who shall be liable for its accuracy. 
 The statement shall be accompanied with a report on the matter prepared by the company’s auditor.
Issuing new shares equal to the amount of the reserve which the extraordinary general assembly decides to include in the capital. 
 Such shares shall be issued in the same form and under the same conditions of issued shares of the same type or class. 
 The shares shall be distributed to shareholders for no consideration, in proportion to their original shares.
Issuing new shares against debt instruments or financing sukuk.
The extraordinary general assembly may decide to increase the company’s issued capital or its authorized capital, if any, provided that the issued capital has been paid in full.
The full payment of capital shall not be required if the unpaid portion of said capital relates to shares issued against the conversion of debt instruments or financing sukuk into shares and the period set for conversion has not yet expired.
In all cases, the extraordinary general assembly may, upon increasing the capital of the company, allocate issued shares or part thereof to the employees of the company or any of its subsidiaries.
Shareholders may not exercise their preemptive rights on issued shares allocated for employees.
The Competent Authority may set the rules and procedures for allocating shares to the employees of the company or any of its subsidiaries.
In all cases, the nominal value of the new shares shall be equal to the nominal value of the original shares of the same type or class.
A shareholder who owns the share on the date of issuance of the extraordinary general assembly’s decision approving the increase of issued capital or the date of issuance of the board of directors’ decision approving the increase of issued capital within the limit of the authorized capital shall have a preemptive right to subscribe to new shares issued against cash contributions. 
 A shareholder shall be notified of such right, if any, by registered mail sent to the address stated in the shareholders’ register or by any means of technology. 
 The shareholder shall also be notified of the capital increase decision, the conditions and method of subscription, and the dates on which said subscription begins and ends, subject to the type and class of shares owned by him.
The extraordinary general assembly may, if provided for in the company’s articles of association, suspend the preemptive rights of shareholders to subscribe to the capital increase against cash contributions or may grant such rights to non-shareholders in cases it deems beneficial to the company.
A shareholder in a joint-stock company may, subject to the Regulations, sell or assign his preemptive rights with or without financial consideration.
Newly issued shares shall be distributed to the holders of preemptive rights requesting subscription in proportion to the preemptive rights they have against the total preemptive rights resulting from the capital increase, provided that the number of newly issued shares they receive does not exceed the number of shares they request, taking into consideration the type and class of their shares. 
 The remaining new shares shall be distributed to the holders of the preemptive rights who request more than their share in proportion to the preemptive rights they have against the total preemptive rights resulting from the capital increase, provided that the number of newly issued shares they receive does not exceed the number of shares they request. 
 Any remaining shares shall be offered to other than the holders of preemptive rights, unless the extraordinary general assembly or the Capital Market Law stipulates otherwise.
If the losses of a joint-stock company amount to half of the issued capital, the board of directors shall, within 60 days from the date of its knowledge thereof, announce the losses and the recommendations relating thereto, and shall, within 180 days from said date, call for an extraordinary general assembly meeting to consider the continuation of the company by taking measures necessary to resolve such losses or the dissolution of the company.
Capital shall be decreased by any of the following methods:
Cancellation of a number of shares equal to the amount to be decreased.
Reduction of the nominal value of a share by canceling a part thereof equal to the amount of losses incurred by the company.
Reduction of the nominal value of a share by returning a part thereof to the shareholder or relieving him from all or part of the unpaid amount of the share’s value.
The company’s purchase of a number of its shares equal to the amount to be decreased, and the cancellation of such shares thereafter.
The extraordinary general assembly may decide to decrease the capital if it exceeds the company’s needs or if the company incurs losses.
In case of losses, the capital may be decreased below the limit specified in Article 59 of this Law.
The decision to decrease the capital shall not be issued until a statement prepared by the board of directors stating the grounds for such decrease, the company’s liabilities, and the effect of the decrease on satisfying such liabilities is presented at the general assembly. 
 Said statement shall include the report of the company's auditor, and may be presented to shareholders in cases where the general assembly decision is passed by circulation.
If the decision to decrease the capital is because it exceeds the company’s needs, the creditors shall be invited to submit their objections to the decrease, if any, at least 45 days prior to the date set for the extraordinary general assembly meeting to decide on the decrease.
 The invitation shall include a statement indicating the amount of capital prior to and after the decrease, the date of the meeting, and the date the decrease becomes effective. 
 If a creditor objects to the decrease and submits supporting documents to the company within the specified period, the company shall pay the debt owed to him if it is due or provide him with a sufficient guarantee if it is not due.
If a creditor notifies the company of his objection to the decrease and the company fails to pay his due debt or to provide him with a sufficient guarantee if his debt is not due, he may petition the competent judicial authority prior to the date set for deciding on the decrease in the extraordinary general assembly meeting. 
 The competent judicial authority may, in such case, order the payment of the debt, the provision of a sufficient guarantee, or the adjournment of the extraordinary general assembly meeting, as the case may be.
Capital decrease shall not be invoked against a creditor who has submitted his application on the date stipulated in paragraph (1) of this Article, unless his due debt is paid or he is provided with a sufficient guarantee for undue amounts.
Equality among holders of shares of the same type and class shall be observed upon the decrease of capital.
If the company’s capital is decreased by purchasing a number of its shares for the purpose of canceling them, shareholders shall be invited to offer their shares for sale. 
 They shall be notified of the company’s intent to purchase shares by registered mail sent to the addresses registered in the shareholders’ register or by announcing such invitation through means of technology.
If the number of shares offered for sale exceeds the number of shares the company decides to purchase, the sale orders shall be reduced in proportion to such increase.
The purchase price of the shares of unlisted joint-stock companies shall be estimated at fair value. 
 However, the shares of listed joint-stock companies shall be purchased in accordance with the Capital Market Law.
Absent a specific provision in this Part, a simplified joint-stock company shall, according to its nature, be subject to the provisions of a joint-stock company, excluding Articles 61, 63, 67-71, 74-88, 90-94, 95(1), 96-98, 100, 101, 111(2), 121, and 122.
The shareholders of a simplified joint-stock company may, in the company’s articles of association, regulate the company’s structure and work procedures.
Shareholders shall, with regards to provisions applicable to simplified joint- stock companies, assume the legal capacity of the ordinary and extraordinary general assemblies of joint-stock companies.
Absent a specific provision in this Part, shareholders may, in the company’s articles of association, designate a person to assume the powers of the general assembly.
Absent a specific provision in this Part, a simplified joint-stock company’s president, manager, or board of directors, as the case may be, shall exercise all the powers assigned to the chairman and members of the board of directors of a joint-stock company and assume their legal capacity.
The company's articles of association shall specify its issued and paid-up capital; it may stipulate that the company has authorized capital.
The minimum capital requirement of a joint-stock company shall not apply to a simplified joint-stock company.
The following information shall be included in the articles of association of a simplified joint-stock company:
Company’s name.
Company’s headquarters.
Company’s purpose.
Company’s authorized capital, if any, and its issued and paid-up capital.
Number of shares; their types and classes, if any; their nominal value; and the rights associated with each type or class.
Company’s term, if any.
Company’s management and provisions related thereto.
Assignment of shares.
Shareholder meetings and the quorum required for their validity.
Issuance of shareholder decisions and the quorum required for their issuance.
Dates on which the company’s fiscal year commences and ends.
Any other terms, conditions, or information the incorporators or shareholders agree to include in the company’s articles of association that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Law.
The following shall be enclosed with the company's articles of association upon submission of its incorporation application:
Incorporators’ names, addresses, and nationalities.
Statement of projected works and expenses for incorporating the company.
An acknowledgment by the incorporators that the company’s shares are fully subscribed, and a statement of the value of paid-up shares.
A certificate of the amount of paid-up capital issued by a bank licensed to operate in the Kingdom.
Incorporators’ decision appointing the company’s president, manager, or board of directors, as the case may be, stating their names, nationalities, addresses, and dates of birth.
An acknowledgment by the incorporators to satisfy all the requirements provided for in this Law which relate to the incorporation of the company.
A statement or report prepared by an accredited valuer or more indicating the fair value of in-kind contributions, if any, and a statement by the incorporators approving the consideration for such contributions.
If the total value of in-kind contributions provided upon the incorporation of the company or upon the increase of its capital does not exceed half of the company’s capital, the valuation of said contributions by an accredited valuer shall not be required, unless the incorporators or shareholders agree otherwise.
If the value of in-kind contributions provided upon the incorporation of the company or upon the increase of its capital exceeds half of the company’s capital, said contributions must be valuated by an accredited valuer, or more, who shall prepare a report indicating the fair value of the contributions. 
 Such report shall be presented to the incorporators or shareholders for deliberation. 
 Providers of in-kind contributions may not vote on the decision relating to said report. 
 If the incorporators or shareholders decide to reduce the value of in-kind contributions specified in the report, such reduction must be approved by the providers of said contributions.
The period between the issuance of the accredited valuer’s report on the fair value of in-kind contributions and the issuance of shares in exchange for said contributions shall not exceed the period prescribed by the Regulations.
If the in-kind contributions are not valuated by an accredited valuer as provided for in this Article, or if said contributions are valuated at a value other than the value provided by the appointed accredited valuer, the incorporators or shareholders shall be personally liable against third parties for the fairness of the valuation of the in-kind contributions, and they shall pay the difference in cash to the company.
In such case, a derivative action shall not be heard after the lapse of five years from the date of the company’s registration with the Commercial Register or from the date of its capital increase, as the case may be.
The method of managing a simplified joint-stock company shall be specified in its articles of association. 
 The company may be managed by one or more presidents or managers or by a board of directors or any other form of management. 
 The company's articles of association shall specify the manner of appointing and removing whomever is tasked with managing the company as well as the powers, authorities, and work procedures thereof. 
 If the company's articles of association do not provide for any provisions in this regard, such provisions shall be determined by shareholders.
A simplified joint-stock company’s president, manager, or board of directors, as the case may be, shall have all the powers necessary to manage the company in a manner that achieves its purposes, excluding acts and dispositions entrusted to shareholders pursuant to a special provision in this Law or the company’s articles of association. 
 The company’s president or manager may, within his powers, delegate others to perform certain acts. 
 The board of directors may, within its powers, authorize one or more of its members or others to perform certain acts.
A simplified joint-stock company’s president, manager, or chairman of the board of directors, as the case may be, shall represent the company before the judiciary, arbitration tribunals, and other parties; he may, however, delegate others to represent the company if the company’s articles of association provide therefor.
A simplified joint-stock company shall be bound by all the acts and dispositions performed in its name by its president, manager, or board of directors, as the case may be, even if said acts and dispositions are beyond the powers thereof, unless such acts and dispositions involve a party who acts in bad faith or a party who knows that such acts and dispositions are beyond the powers of the same.
Provisions relating to the liability of the board of directors of a joint-stock company shall apply to a simplified joint-stock company’s president, manager, or board of directors, as the case may be.
The provision of Article 72 of this Law shall apply to a simplified joint-stock company’s president, manager, or board of directors, as the case may be.
The articles of association of a simplified joint-stock company shall specify the matters to be decided by shareholders and the manner and conditions for deciding on such matters.
However, shareholders shall decide matters that fall within the powers of a joint-stock company’s ordinary or extraordinary general assembly, which relate to the increase or decrease of capital; conversion of the company into another form of company, or the merger, division, or dissolution thereof; appointment of an auditor; discussion of financial statements; distribution of dividends; or amendment of the company’s articles of association.
The company’s articles of association shall specify the quorum necessary for the validity of shareholder meetings and decisions.
The company's articles of association may specify different quorums for presenting matters to shareholders and for deciding on such matters.
The company's articles of association shall specify the matters which require the unanimous approval of shareholders.
Subject to the company’s articles of association, shareholder meetings of a simplified joint-stock company shall be held upon a call by its president, manager, or board of directors, as the case may be, in accordance with the conditions specified in the company’s articles of association.
A shareholder meeting may be called for if requested by the auditor, if any, or by a shareholder, or more, representing at least 10% of the company’s voting shares.
The meeting invitation shall be sent to all shareholders at least five days prior to the date set for the meeting. 
 The invitation shall specify the meeting venue, date, and time and shall include the meeting agenda and the items that require a vote by shareholders.
The invitation may specify the venue, date, and time for a second meeting if the quorum required for holding the first meeting is not met.
Shareholders shall be notified of the meeting by registered mail sent to the addresses provided for in the shareholders’ register, or through means of technology, unless the company’s articles of association stipulate otherwise.
If shareholders are called for a meeting to consider matters provided for in Article 145(1) of this Law, each shareholder shall have the right to access and review the information and documents related to such matters at any time during the five days prior to the date set for the meeting, unless the company's articles of association specify a longer period.
Shareholder meetings shall be held at the company's headquarters or at any other location determined by the shareholders; such meetings may be held remotely.
Shareholders representing all of the company's voting shares may hold their meetings without observing the conditions and periods prescribed for the call.
At the end of the company’s fiscal year, a simplified joint-stock company’s president, manager, or board of directors, as the case may be, shall prepare the company’s financial statements as well as a report on its activities and financial position for the ending fiscal year. 
 The report shall include a proposal on the manner of distributing dividends, if any.
Such documents and the auditor's report, if any, shall be presented to the shareholders within six months from the date on which the company's fiscal year ends. 
 The president, manager, or board of directors, as the case may be, shall deposit said documents as determined by the Regulations.
Deliberations and decisions of shareholder meetings as well as decisions issued by circulation shall be recorded in minutes and entered into a special register signed by the company’s president, manager, or board of directors, as the case may be.
The company may use means of technology to document and record such deliberations and decisions.
Shareholder decisions which the Regulations require to be registered with the Commercial Register shall be registered therewith by the company’s president, manager, or board of directors, as the case may be, within 15 days from their issuance date.
The company’s articles of association may provide for the issuance of shareholder decisions by circulation.
In such case, the company's president, manager, or board of directors, as the case may be, shall send to all shareholders the proposed decision along with the relevant documents, the instructions to be followed to approve the decision, and the date set for its issuance.
Unless the company’s articles of association provide for other means of notification, the proposed decision and the relevant documents may be sent to shareholders using any of the following means:
Registered mail.
Personal delivery to the shareholders or their legal representatives.
E-mail or other means of technology.
The company’s articles of association shall specify the quorum required for the validity of issuing shareholder decisions by circulation.
The incorporation of a simplified joint-stock company by a single person or the transfer of all its shares to a single person shall entail the following:
The liability of such person shall be limited to what he allocates as capital.
Said person shall have the powers and authorities of shareholders provided for in this Part; his decisions shall be issued in writing and recorded in a special register kept at the company.