The company’s articles of association may provide for restrictions on the disposition of shares, as follows:
Restricting the disposition of shares for a period not exceeding 10 years from their issuance date.
Such period may be extended if unanimously approved by shareholders.
Requiring the approval of the company or shareholders prior to the disposition of shares.
Any disposition of shares in violation of such restrictions shall be deemed null and void.
The company’s articles of association may provide for the conditions under which a shareholder is obligated to assign his shares. 
 The purchase price of such shares shall be determined on the basis of their fair value, unless the company’s articles of association stipulate otherwise.
The company’s articles of association may provide for the suspension of the rights associated with his shares, excluding financial rights, until assignment of his shares is completed.
Except for criminal acts, the company’s articles of association may provide for the settlement of disputes of any nature which may arise among the shareholders or between the company and its president, manager, or any of its board members, as the case may be, by resorting to arbitration or alternative means of settlement.
The unanimous approval of shareholders shall be required to include in the company’s articles of association the provisions of Articles 151, 152, and 153 of this Law and any amendments thereto.
The Regulations shall specify the provisions necessary for the implementation of the provisions of this Part.
A limited liability company is a company incorporated by one or more natural or legal persons. 
 The company’s assets and liabilities shall be deemed separate from those of its partners or owner; the company shall be solely liable for its incurred debts and liabilities as well as any debts and liabilities arising from its activities. 
 The company’s owner and partners shall not be liable for such debts and liabilities except in proportion to their interests in the capital.
The incorporation of a limited liability company by a single person or the transfer of all of its interests to a single person shall entail the following:
Said person shall have the powers and authorities of the manager, board of managers, and general assembly of partners stipulated in this Part; his decisions shall be issued in writing and recorded in a special register kept at the company.
Said person may appoint a manager, or more, to represent the company before the judiciary, arbitration tribunals, and other parties, and to be responsible before him for its management.
A single-person limited liability company shall have articles of association; any reference to the articles of incorporation in the provisions applicable to a limited liability company shall mean the articles of association.
The following information shall be included in the articles of incorporation of a limited liability company:
Partners’ names and particulars.
Company’s name.
Company’s headquarters.
Company’s purpose.
Company’s capital and its distribution among partners.
An acknowledgment by the partners that their contributions are fully paid.
Company’s term, if any.
Company’s management.
Assignment of interests.
Means of sending notifications to partners.
Issuance of partner decisions.
Manner of distributing profits and losses among partners.
Dates on which the company’s fiscal year commences and ends.
Termination of the company.
Any other terms, conditions, or information the partners agree to include in the company’s articles of incorporation that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Law.
The following shall be enclosed with the company’s articles of incorporation upon submission of its incorporation application:
An acknowledgment by the incorporators to satisfy all the requirements provided for in this Law which relate to the incorporation of the company.
A statement or report prepared by an accredited valuer, or more, indicating the fair value of in-kind contributions, if any, and an acknowledgment by the incorporators approving the consideration for such contributions.
In-kind contributions shall be valuated in accordance with the provisions of Article 141 of this Law.
A limited liability company shall be managed by one manager, or more, appointed from among the partners or others. 
 The partners shall appoint said manager or managers in the company’s articles of incorporation or in a separate contract for a specified or unspecified period.
In case of multiple managers, a board of managers may be formed pursuant to a decision by the partners.
The company’s articles of incorporation or a decision issued by the partners shall specify the method of managing the company and the majority required for issuing decisions if the company has multiple managers or a board of managers.
The manager shall represent the limited liability company before the judiciary, arbitration tribunals, and other parties. 
 He may delegate some of his powers to others to perform certain acts.
A decision appointing or replacing a manager or restricting his powers shall not be valid against third parties except after its registration with the Commercial Register.
The company shall be bound by the acts of the manager which are within the company's purposes.
If a limited liability company has a single manager and his position becomes vacant, the partners shall appoint a new manager within 15 days from the date they become aware thereof. 
 The company's auditor, if any, or any of the partners may call for a general assembly meeting to appoint a new manager.
The partners may remove the manager, or managers in case of multiple managers, whether appointed in the company’s articles of incorporation or in a separate contract; in such case, the partners shall appoint a new manager to replace the removed manager. 
 If the manager is a partner in the company, he may not vote on the decision relating to his removal.
A partner, or more, representing at least one fourth of the company’s capital may petition the competent judicial authority to remove the manager or managers, as the case may be.
A limited liability company shall have a general assembly comprising all the partners of the company.
The general assembly of partners shall convene upon a call by the manager or managers, as the case may be, in accordance with the conditions specified in the company’s articles of incorporation, provided that it is held at least once a year during the six-month period following the end of the company’s fiscal year.
The general assembly of partners may be held at any time upon the request of the managers, auditor, or a partner, or more, representing at least 10% of the capital.
The invitation for the general assembly meeting shall be sent to all partners by registered mail, means of technology, or any other means stipulated in the articles of incorporation at least 21 days prior to the date set for said meeting.
Partners who represent all of the interests in the company’s capital may hold a general assembly meeting without observing the conditions and periods stipulated for the call.
Deliberations of the general assembly of partners as well as its decisions and partner decisions issued by circulation shall be recorded in minutes and entered into a special register prepared by the company for such purpose.
The company may use means of technology to record and enter such deliberations and decisions.
Meetings of the general assembly of partners may be held and partners may participate in deliberations and vote on decisions using means of technology.
Decisions of partners shall be issued at the general assembly.
However, such decisions may be issued by circulation; in such case, the company’s manager shall send the proposed decisions along with the relevant documents to each partner to vote thereon in writing.
Unless the company’s articles of incorporation provide for other means of notification, the proposed decisions and the relevant documents may be sent using any of the following means:
Registered mail.
Personal delivery to the partners or their legal representatives.
E-mail or other means of technology.
In all cases, decisions shall be deemed valid only if approved by a partner, or more, representing at least more than half of the capital, unless the company’s articles of incorporation provide for a greater majority.
If the majority stipulated in paragraph (3) of this Article is not achieved in the first deliberation or consultation, the partners shall be called for a meeting. 
 In such case, decisions shall be issued by the approval of the majority interests represented in the meeting regardless of the percentage said interests represent in the capital, unless the company’s articles of incorporation stipulate otherwise.
The company’s articles of incorporation may provide for any other means to call for meetings or communicate decisions.
The company’s manager shall, for each fiscal year, prepare the company’s financial statements, a report on its activities and financial position for the ending fiscal year, and a proposal for the distribution of dividends, if any.
The manager shall make such documents available to the auditor, if any, at least 45 days prior to the date set for the annual general assembly meeting.
The company’s manager shall provide the partners with the company’s financial statements and the report on its activities, as well as the auditor’s report, if any, whether by means of technology or by any other means provided for in the company’s articles of incorporation, at least 21 days prior to the date set for the annual general assembly meeting. 
 He shall also deposit such documents in accordance with the Regulations.
The agenda of the annual meeting of the general assembly of partners shall include the following items:
Reviewing the manager’s report on the company's activities and financial position for the ending fiscal year.
Reviewing and discussing the financial statements of the ending fiscal year.
Discussing the auditor's report for the ending fiscal year, if any, and making a decision thereon.
Deciding on the manager’s proposal on the distribution of dividends, if any.
The general assembly of partners may not deliberate matters other than those included in the agenda, unless new developments requiring deliberation thereof arise during the meeting.
If a partner requests the inclusion of an item in the agenda, the company’s manager shall grant such request; if the request is not granted, said partner may resort to the assembly.
Each partner is entitled to discuss items on the agenda of the general assembly of partners and the company’s manager must respond to the partners’ questions. 
 If the partner is not satisfied with the response, he may resort to the assembly.
Without prejudice to the rights of bona fide third parties, any partner may petition the competent judicial authority to invalidate a decision issued by the general assembly of partners in violation of the provisions of this Law or the company’s articles of incorporation.
Such petition may be filed only by partners who object to said decision in writing or partners who could not object to the decision after becoming aware thereof. 
 The invalidation of the decision by the competent judicial authority shall render it null and void for all partners.
A lawsuit filed for invalidation shall not be heard after the lapse of 90 days from the date the decision referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article is issued.
To file the lawsuit referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article, the plaintiff must be a partner in the company upon filing the lawsuit and throughout its proceedings.
A partner shall have the right to participate in deliberations and vote on decisions, and shall be entitled to a number of votes equal to the number of interests he owns. 
 Any agreement to the contrary may not be concluded.
A partner may designate in writing another partner to act as his proxy to attend partner meetings and vote therein, unless the company’s articles of incorporation stipulate otherwise.
A stipulation may be included in the articles of incorporation permitting a partner to designate in writing a non-partner to act as his proxy to attend partner meetings and vote therein.
A non-managing partner may present his opinion to the manager. 
 Said partner, or his designee, may request access to the company’s operations and examine its records and documents at the company’s headquarters twice during the company’s fiscal year. 
 The company must respond to his request within 15 days from the date of submission thereof.
Any condition to the contrary shall be deemed null and void.
A person who becomes privy to any information, pursuant to this Article, shall maintain the confidentiality of said information and shall not use it for any purpose which may cause harm to the company or any of its partners. 
 In case of non-compliance, said person shall be liable for any damage arising therefrom.
The company’s articles of incorporation including any increase or decrease to the capital may be amended upon the approval of one or more partners, representing at least three-quarters of the capital, unless the articles of incorporation provide for a higher percentage.
A partner shall, upon the approval of a capital increase through the issuance of new interests, have preemptive rights to acquire the interests issued against cash contributions in proportion to said partner’s interest in the company’s capital, as specified by the Regulations.
The company’s capital may not be increased by raising the nominal value of the partners' interests nor may preemptive rights be suspended, without the unanimous agreement of the partners.
Except for criminal acts, the company’s articles of incorporation may provide for the settlement of disputes of any nature which may arise among the partners or between the company and its managers by resorting to arbitration or alternative means of settlement.
Partners shall determine the capital of the company in its articles of incorporation. 
 Such capital shall be divided into indivisible and untradeable interests of equal value.
If an interest is owned by multiple persons, the company may suspend the use of rights associated therewith until the owners of such interest select one person from among themselves to act as the sole owner of such interest against the company.
The company may set a deadline for the owners to make the selection. 
 If the owners fail to make the selection before such deadline, the company may sell the interest on behalf of its owners.
In such case, the interest shall be offered to the other partners and then to non- partners in accordance with Article 178 of this Law, unless the company’s articles of incorporation stipulate otherwise.
Interests shall entail equal rights to net profit and liquidation surplus, unless the company’s articles of incorporation stipulate otherwise.
The general assembly shall determine the percentage of the net profit to be distributed to the partners after deducting reserves, if any.
A partner shall be entitled to his share of the profits pursuant to a decision issued by the general assembly or the partners in this regard. 
 Such decision shall determine the eligibility and distribution dates.
The general assembly of partners may decide to decrease the capital if it exceeds the company’s needs or if the company incurs losses.
In case of losses, the decision to decrease the capital shall not be issued until a statement prepared by the company manager stating the grounds for such decrease, the company’s liabilities, and the effect of the decrease on such liabilities is presented at the general assembly of partners; said statement shall include the report of the company's auditor.
If partner decisions are passed by circulation, it may suffice to present the statement to the partners.
If the decision to decrease the capital is because it exceeds the company’s needs, each of the company’s managers shall prepare a statement of the company’s financial solvency stating that:
upon reviewing the company’s position, he affirms that, as of the date of the statement, there is nothing that would render the company incapable of paying its debts and liabilities; and
the company is able to pay its debts and liabilities due within the 12 months following the date of the statement.
Each of the company’s managers shall sign the statement referred to in paragraph (2) of this Article, indicating the date thereof. 
 The partners shall be provided with said statement at least 15 days prior to the date set for making the capital decrease decision.
The partners shall submit a draft amendment of the company’s articles of incorporation which includes the capital decrease to the Commercial Register within 15 days from the date on which the capital decrease decision is issued. 
 The documents referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Article, as the case may be, shall be enclosed with the draft. 
 The capital decrease decision shall take effect upon its registration and publication with the Commercial Register.
The company’s articles of incorporation may provide for setting aside a certain percentage of the net profit to create a reserve allocated for purposes specified in the articles of incorporation.
The partners may, when determining dividends from net profit at the annual general assembly meeting, decide to create reserves to serve the company’s interest or ensure the distribution of fixed dividends, as feasible, to the partners.
Said assembly may allocate amounts from the net profit for social objectives that benefit company staff.
A partner may assign his interest to any of the partners in accordance with the conditions stipulated in the company’s articles of incorporation.
If a partner intends to assign his interest, with or without consideration, to a non-partner, he must notify the other partners, through the company’s manager, of the name of the assignee or purchaser and the conditions of the assignment or sale, and the manager must notify the partners upon receipt of such notification.
Each partner may exercise the right of first refusal and request to purchase said interest and pay its value or the company may purchase said interest within 30 days from the date the manager is notified of the agreed upon price.
If multiple partners decide to exercise their right to purchase said interest, the interest shall be divided among them in proportion to their interest in the capital.
If a disagreement arises over the value of the interest, an accredited valuer, or more, shall valuate said interest at the expense of the partner exercising said right, or the company, as the case may be, and prepare a report indicating the fair value of the assignor’s interest.
If the period prescribed for the right of first refusal expires and the partner does not invoke such right or does not pay the value of the interest, or the company does not purchase the interest, the partner owning the interest may assign such interest to a third party.
The company’s articles of incorporation may stipulate a different notification method for the assignment of interests, a different method for their valuation, or a longer period for exercising the right of first refusal regarding such interests and for payment of their value or a longer period for their purchase by the company.
The right of first refusal provided for in this Article shall not apply to the transfer of the ownership of interests by way of inheritance or bequest or pursuant to a judgment rendered by the competent judicial authority.
A limited liability company may, in accordance with the Capital Market Law, issue negotiable debt instruments or financing sukuk.
Debt instruments or financing sukuk shall be issued with the approval of the partners in accordance with the conditions prescribed for amending the company’s articles of incorporation.
The company may purchase its own interests or accept them as a pledge if permitted under its articles of incorporation. 
 Interests purchased by the company shall have no voting rights in the general assembly.
Interests may be pledged and the pledgee may receive dividends, unless the pledge agreement stipulates otherwise.
The Regulations shall specify the rules necessary for the implementation of the provisions of this Article.
The company’s articles of incorporation may, upon the approval of one or more partners representing at least 90% of the company’s capital, provide for the following:
Majority partners shall have the right to obligate minority partners to accept an offer from a bona fide buyer to purchase all the company’s interests for the same price and under the same terms and conditions applicable to the purchase of majority interests.
In cases in which the majority sell their interests, minority partners shall have the right to obligate majority partners to guarantee the sale of minority interests for the same price and under the same terms and conditions applicable to the sale of majority interests.
If the losses of a company amount to half of its capital, the company’s manager shall, within 60 days from the date of his knowledge thereof, call for a meeting of the general assembly of partners to consider the continuation of the company by taking measures necessary to resolve such losses, or the dissolution of the company.
If the company is incorporated for a fixed term, said term may be extended prior to its termination for another term pursuant to a decision issued by the general assembly of partners which comprises any number of partners owning half of the represented capital interests, unless the company’s articles of incorporation provide for a greater majority.
If a decision to extend the company’s term is not issued and the company continues to operate, its term shall be extended for a similar term subject to the same conditions stipulated in its articles of incorporation.
A partner who does not want to continue with the company may withdraw therefrom, and his interests shall be valuated in accordance with the provisions of Article 178 of this Law. 
 An extension shall not take effect until the interests of said partner are sold to the other partners or to others, as the case may be, and their value is paid to said partner, unless the withdrawing partner and the remaining partners agree otherwise.
A party with an interest in non-extension may object thereto and request non- enforcement of such extension against him.
A limited liability company shall not terminate upon a partner’s death, interdiction, withdrawal, insolvency, or upon the initiation of any liquidation proceedings under the Bankruptcy Law against such partner, unless provided for in the company’s articles of incorporation.
A public non-profit company shall take the form of a joint-stock company and it may not take any other form. 
 The profits realized from carrying out its activities shall be used in non-profit areas of spending that exclusively serve the community.
The Ministry shall, in coordination with the National Center for Non-Profit Sector, designate such areas.
A private non-profit company shall take the form of a limited liability company, joint-stock company, or simplified joint-stock company, and it may not take any other form. 
 The profits realized from carrying out its activities shall be used in non-profit areas of spending.
A non-profit company shall not offer its shares for public subscription.
Absent a specific provision in this Part, a non-profit company shall be subject to the provisions relating to its form in a manner not inconsistent with its nature.
Incorporation of a public non-profit company requires that its articles of association designate the non-profit areas of spending. 
 A private non-profit company may designate the non-profit areas of spending in its articles of incorporation or articles of association.
Subject to relevant laws, a non-profit company may collect cash or in-kind consideration for its activities, products, and services. 
 It may also engage in any legitimate activity to gain profits to be used in the areas of spending designated in its articles of incorporation or articles of association.
If the decision amending the articles of association of a public non-profit company includes amending the provisions for the disposition of assets, the powers of the board of directors, or the company’s areas of spending, said amendment shall not become effective until the Ministry’s approval is obtained.
A partner or shareholder in a non-profit company shall be deemed a member in said company.
The articles of incorporation or articles of association of a non-profit company may provide for the following:
Determining categories of membership as well as the terms and conditions thereof.
Determining the powers of membership categories and the matters requiring the approval of the members’ assembly as well as the required quorum therefor, including the right to monitor the manager or board of directors and to ensure that the company’s profits are used to achieve its objectives in the areas of spending designated in its articles of incorporation or articles of association.
Granting a certain category of members the right to vote on company decisions in a special assembly.
Granting a certain category of members the right to appoint one or more company managers or board members. 
 In such case, the appointee may not be removed from his position except by the category of members that appointed him.
Issuing membership certificates that are not negotiable.
As an exception, a provision may be made for a private non-profit company member to assign his membership.
Imposing the payment of annual fees or cash or in-kind contributions on one or more membership categories.
Stipulating the provision of work or service to the company in exchange for membership therein.
The Ministry may regulate matters relating to membership in non-profit companies.
Each category of membership shall have equal rights and obligations. 
 A member shall have all the rights associated with his membership, including the right to participate in the deliberations of member assemblies and the right to access the company’s records and documents.
Subject to the provisions of this Law and the articles of incorporation or articles of association of a non-profit company, membership of a non-profit company shall terminate in the following cases:
Death of a natural person or termination of legal personality.
Assignment of the membership of a private non-profit company to a third party.
Cancellation in accordance with the provisions of the company’s articles of incorporation or articles of association.
Expiration of membership term without renewal.
Termination of the company.
A member may request the termination of his membership, provided that he compensates the company if such termination results in a breach of his obligations.
The information of members shall be recorded in a special register prepared by the non-profit company for such purpose.
The company shall provide the Commercial Register with the information referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article and any amendment thereto within 15 days from the date of the company’s registration with the Commercial Register or from the date of the amendment, as the case may be.
Subject to the provisions of relevant laws and the company’s articles of association, a public non-profit company may accept, manage, or invest cash and in-kind gifts, bequests, and endowments, and disburse from their proceeds in accordance with the conditions, if any, of the donor, testator, or endower. 
 If the company wishes to amend or be relieved from such conditions, and cannot obtain the approval of the donor, testator, or endower due to his death, disability, or absence, it may petition the competent judicial authority, which shall decide on the request as it deems appropriate to fulfill the conditions of the donor, testator, or endower.
A non-profit company shall use the profits realized from its activities in the areas of spending designated in its articles of incorporation or articles of association.
The company may allocate some of its profits to maximize its investments and expand its operations as specified by the Regulations.
A non-profit company may not distribute any of its profits to the company’s members,  managers,  board  members,  or  employees,  unless  such distribution of profits is included in its areas of spending.
The Regulations shall specify the maximum percentage of profits distributed in accordance with this paragraph.
A non-profit company may pay remuneration or any other reasonable benefits to its managers, board members, or employees in exchange for the services and work they provide to the company.
A non-profit company member may file a lawsuit with the competent judicial authority on behalf of the company to request the redemption of any profits distributed or disbursed in violation of the provisions of this Article.
A personal creditor of a member of a public non-profit company may not seek enforcement against the shares of such member or the rights associated therewith.
Subject to relevant laws and decisions, non-profit companies may be incorporated by government agencies, public bodies and institutions, universities, and other public legal persons permitted to incorporate such companies.
Public sector employees may incorporate or participate in the incorporation of public non-profit companies.
Notwithstanding relevant laws, the Zakat, Tax, and Customs Authority shall, in coordination with the Ministry, set the necessary rules for exempting non-profit companies from the provisions of levying zakat and taxes and for deducting donations made to such companies upon determining the tax base of the taxpayer.
A professional company is a company incorporated by one or more persons licensed to practice one or more professions, or by a combination of licensed professionals and others; its purpose is to practice such professions.
A professional company shall take any of the forms of companies stated in Article 4 of this Law.
Absent a specific provision in this Part, a professional company shall be subject to the provisions governing its form in a manner not inconsistent with its nature.
A partner or shareholder in a professional company, of any form, shall not acquire the capacity of a merchant by virtue of his partnership or ownership of interests or shares in the company.
Persons licensed to practice a single profession may incorporate a professional company which may take any of the forms stated in Article 4 of this Law.
A person licensed to practice a single profession may incorporate a professional joint-stock company, simplified joint-stock company, or single- person limited liability company to practice his profession.
If said person is licensed to practice multiple professions, he may practice all or some of his professions through the company, upon satisfying the conditions and rules specified in the Regulations.
A professional company may be incorporated by persons licensed to practice multiple professions, and it may be jointly incorporated by persons licensed to practice one or more professions and a non-Saudi professional company.
The Regulations shall specify the conditions for the incorporation of such companies and the rules regulating their activities.
A legal person or a natural person who is not licensed to practice any of the professions for which a professional company is incorporated may be a partner or shareholder in a professional company, but may not be a general partner in a general partnership or a limited partnership.
The Regulations shall determine the conditions and rules therefor as well as the general rules for managing this form of professional company to maintain the independence of the professional partners or shareholders in practicing their professions.
A partner or shareholder in a professional company who practices a profession may not be a partner or shareholder in another professional company practicing the same profession, unless permitted under the company’s articles of incorporation or articles of association and without prejudice to relevant laws.
The Regulations shall specify the provisions and rules permitting a licensed partner or shareholder to be a partner or shareholder in another professional company.
A professional company shall be incorporated in accordance with the incorporation procedures prescribed for the form it takes.
Partners or shareholders in a professional company may not dissolve such company except after the dissolution is announced and the parties dealing with the company are notified thereof in writing, in accordance with the procedures specified by the Regulations.
A professional company may not practice the professions for which it is incorporated except through its licensed partners or shareholders.
However, it may seek the assistance of other persons licensed in such professions, provided that said persons operate under the company’s supervision and responsibility.
A professional company may only practice the professions for which it is incorporated.
A professional company may not engage in commercial activities.
It may, however, own real property assets and invest its funds in real estate, commercial papers, or any other type of investment to serve its purposes.
The Regulations shall specify the necessary rules therefor.
A professional company shall, in practicing the professions for which it is incorporated, be subject to the supervision of the relevant supervisory authorities.
A professional company shall comply with the laws and regulations set by the relevant authorities within their powers.
The relevant authority may, within its powers, inspect a professional company and review its records and documents to ensure its compliance with the laws related to the profession for which it is incorporated. 
 The professional company must provide any documents required therefrom.
A partner or shareholder in a professional company may only practice his profession through the company, unless it is owned by a single person.
Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this Article, a partner or shareholder may practice his profession separately from the company if the other partners agree thereto in writing or upon obtaining the approval of the general assembly, as the case may be.
If a partner or shareholder violates the provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Article, the company shall be entitled to the fees and other financial benefits he receives.
Without prejudice to paragraph (2) of this Article, a professional company shall be managed by one person, or more, from among its partners or others. 
 If it is managed by one person, said person must be a licensed partner. 
 If it is managed by more than one person, the number of licensed partners shall not be less than the number specified by the Regulations.
The company’s articles of incorporation or articles of association shall determine the conditions for appointing the manager as well as his powers, remuneration, term, and the manner of his removal.
A professional joint-stock company shall be managed by a board of directors comprising its shareholders or others. 
 The Regulations shall specify the number of board members who must be licensed shareholders.
The company’s articles of association shall determine the board’s powers and the provisions relating to its formation.
The powers of the manager or board of directors of a professional company owned by more than one person may not prejudice the independence of partners or shareholders in practicing their professions.
A partner or shareholder in a professional company shall be personally liable to the company and other partners or shareholders, as the case may be, for his malpractice.