A non-managing partner may not interfere in the management of the company.
Twice during the financial year, he or his authorized representative may inspect the company's business operations, examine its records and documents, extract a summary statement of the company's financial condition from these records and documents, and provide opinions to the company's director.
Any agreement to the contrary is null and void.
Unless the company's memorandum of association provides otherwise, if the director is a partner appointed in the company's memorandum of association, he may only be removed by a decision issued by the unanimous consent of the other partners, and if he is appointed in a separate contract, he may be removed by a decision issued by a numerical majority of the partners.
If the director is a non-partner, whether appointed in the company's articles of incorporation or in a separate contract, he may be removed by a decision issued by a numerical majority of the partners.
The director appointed in the company's memorandum of association or in a separate contract may be removed by a final judgment of the competent judicial authority, whether he is one of the partners or others.
The removal of the director does not result in the dissolution of the company, unless the company's articles of incorporation stipulate otherwise.
The director of the company, whether one of the partners or others, may retire from management, provided that he informs the partners in writing of his retirement at least sixty (60) days before its effective date, unless the company's memorandum of association or the independent contract appointing him stipulates otherwise, otherwise he shall be liable for compensation for the damages resulting from his retirement.
The retirement of a director does not result in the dissolution of the company, unless the company's articles of association stipulate otherwise.
Partners' shares may not be represented in negotiable instruments.
A partner may not assign his shares, in whole or in part, except subject to the restrictions stipulated in the company's articles of association or with the consent of the other partners.
Any agreement to assign shares without observing the restrictions or the consent of the partners is void.
This waiver must be registered with the Commercial Registry.
A partner may assign to third parties the financial rights related to his share in the company, and this assignment shall have no effect except between the two parties.
If a new partner joins the company with a new share, he is personally liable in all his assets and jointly with the other partners for the company's debts before and after his joining.
However, it may be agreed to exempt him from liability for previous debts by unanimous agreement of the partners, and this agreement shall be effective against creditors from the date of its registration and notification at the Commercial Registry.
If a partner withdraws or is expelled from the company, he shall not be liable for the debts that arise after his withdrawal or expulsion is registered and publicized at the Commercial Registry, and shall remain liable for the debts that arose before that, unless he is exempted with the consent of the other partners and the company's creditors.
If one of the partners renounces his share, the assignee shall be liable to the Company's creditors for its debts before and after his joining, and the assignee shall not be liable for the debts to the Company's creditors unless they object to his exemption from liability within (30) days from the date the Company informs them thereof, and if they object, the assignee shall be jointly liable for the debts prior to his renunciation.
Unless otherwise stipulated in the company's articles of association, a partner may withdraw from the company at his sole will, provided he informs the other partners at least sixty (60) days before the date he specifies for withdrawal.
It is permissible to agree in the company's articles of incorporation on the procedures for removing the partners from the company.
If the contract does not include this, the numerical majority of the partners may apply to the competent judicial authority to remove one or more partners from the company if there are legitimate reasons for this, and the company shall continue to exist among the remaining partners.
The partner who withdraws from the company, or the other partners in the case of removing a partner, must register and publicize this at the Commercial Registry, and the withdrawal or removal shall not be effective against third parties until after the registration and publicizing.
Upon the request of one or more partners, the competent judicial authority may decide to dissolve the company if its continuation is not possible between the partners.
Profits and losses and the share of each partner therein shall be determined at the end of the company's fiscal year from financial statements prepared in accordance with the accounting standards adopted in the Kingdom, and each partner shall be considered a creditor of the company with his share of the profits once this share is determined, unless the company's memorandum of association stipulates special provisions for profits and losses.
What is reduced from the company's capital due to losses shall be supplemented from the profits of the following years; otherwise, a partner may not be required to supplement what is reduced from his share of the capital due to losses except with his consent.
A partner may not be required to pay a debt owed by the company until the debt has been established on the basis of a final court judgment or an executive deed, and after it has been warned to fulfill the debt, and it is impossible to collect the right from it.
When a partner fulfills the company's debt, he has recourse against the other partners in proportion to what he has paid for his share.
Unless the value of the shares is agreed upon or the company's memorandum of association stipulates the method of valuation, the value of a partner's share in the company if he withdraws or is removed from the company, or if any of the liquidation procedures are opened against him in accordance with the Bankruptcy Law, or if he dies and his heirs do not enter the company, shall be assessed according to a report prepared by one or more authorized appraisers indicating the fair value of each partner's share in the company's assets on the date of the occurrence of the incident, and neither the partner nor his heirs shall have any share in what comes afterwards except to the extent that these rights result from operations prior to that incident.
Unless the memorandum of association stipulates the method of valuation of a partner's share if he assigns it, his share will be valued according to the value agreed upon with the assignee.
The Solidarity Company shall not be terminated by the death of any of the partners, nor by the imprisonment of any of the partners, nor by the opening of any of the liquidation procedures against him according to the Bankruptcy Law, nor by his exit, nor by his withdrawal, unless the company's Memorandum of Association stipulates so.
In this case, the company continues among the remaining partners, and this partner or his heirs have only his share in the company's assets, which is estimated according to Article (49) of the Law.
The articles of association of the company may stipulate that in the event of the death of any of the partners, the company shall continue with the heirs of the deceased, even if they are minors who are legally prohibited from practicing business, and the heirs of the partner who are minors or legally prohibited from practicing business shall not be liable for the debts of the company if it continues except to the extent of their respective shares in the share of their heirs in the capital of the company.
In this case, the company must be converted within a period not exceeding (one year) from the date of their inheritor's death into a simple partnership company in which the minor or the person legally prohibited from practicing business becomes a testamentary partner, otherwise the company will be lapsed by force of law with the passage of that period, unless the minor - during this period - reaches the age of majority or the reason for the prohibition from practicing business ceases to exist and that minor or person prohibited from practicing business wishes to be a solidarity partner.
If, upon the death of any of the partners, or the seizure, or the opening of any of the liquidation procedures against him in accordance with the Bankruptcy Law, or his withdrawal or exit, only one partner remains in the company, this partner shall be given a period of (ninety) days to rectify the status of the company either by introducing another partner or converting it to another form of the companies listed in the Law, otherwise the company shall be terminated by the force of the Law upon the expiry of this period of time.
A simple partnership: It is a company consisting of two teams of partners, one team that includes at least one natural or legal partner who is personally liable in all his assets and jointly for the company's debts and obligations, and another team that includes at least one natural or legal partner who is a trustee who is not liable for the company's debts and obligations except to the extent of his share in the company's capital.
A testamentary partner does not acquire the status of a merchant.
Solidarity partners in a simple recommendation company are subject to the provisions applicable to partners in a solidarity company.
The simple partnership company shall be subject to the provisions of the solidarity company unless specifically provided for in this section.
The testamentary partner - or whoever authorizes him - may, twice during the financial year, inspect the company's business, examine its records and documents, and extract a summary statement of the company's financial condition from these records and documents.
A testamentary partner may not interfere in the work of the external management, even if a power of attorney is issued to him, if he intervenes, he is personally liable in all his assets and jointly for the company's debts and obligations arising from his actions.
However, the testamentary partner may participate in the internal management of the company as stipulated in its memorandum of association, and this participation does not create any liability for him unless the actions he performs lead third parties to believe that he is a joint partner, in which case he shall be personally liable for all his assets and jointly for the debts and obligations of the company in the face of that third party.
Solidarity partners and testators may agree in the company's memorandum of association to have a general assembly, specify its competencies, and determine the procedures for convening it.
Unless otherwise stipulated in the company's memorandum of association, the partners' decisions shall be made in accordance with the following:
Decisions related to amending the Memorandum of Association: With the unanimous consent of the joint partners and the approval of the owners of the majority of the capital of the testamentary partners.
Other decisions: With the approval of the numerical majority of the opinions of the joint partners.
A testamentary partner may not request the dissolution of the company or participate in voting on matters pertaining to the appointment or removal of its directors.
A testamentary partner may assign all or part of his share to any of the other partners in the company.
A testamentary partner may assign all or some of his shares to third parties after the approval of all the joint partners and the owners of the majority of the capital of the testamentary partners, unless otherwise stipulated in the company's articles of association.
A joint partner may assign all or part of his share in favor of a testamentary partner or a third party, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (2) of this Article.
If the testamentary partner does not submit his share of the company's capital by the due date before assigning it, the assignee becomes responsible for submitting it.
Unless otherwise stipulated in the company's memorandum of association, joint partners or testators may be introduced into the company after the approval of all joint partners without the need to obtain the approval of the testator partners, unless the company's memorandum of association provides otherwise.
The simple partnership company shall not be terminated by the death of any of the recommended partners, nor by his confinement, nor by his insolvency, nor by the opening of any liquidation proceedings against him in accordance with the Bankruptcy Law, nor by his withdrawal, unless the company's memorandum of association stipulates so.
Joint stock company: It is a company established by one or more persons, whether natural or legal, whose capital is divided into tradable shares, and the company is solely responsible for the debts and obligations incurred or arising from its activity, and the shareholder's liability is limited to paying the value of the shares he subscribed to.
The issued capital of the joint stock company must not be less than (five hundred thousand) riyals, and the paid-up capital must not be less than (one-fourth).
A joint stock company shall have an issued capital representing the subscribed shares, and the company's articles of association may specify an authorized capital.
By a decision of the Board of Directors, the issued capital may be increased within the limits of the authorized capital, provided that the issued capital has been paid in full.
If during the incorporation phase, the founders do not limit the subscription of all shares to themselves, they must offer the unsubscribed shares for subscription in accordance with the Capital Market Law.
The Ministry and the Authority may establish the controls, procedures, documents and approvals required to establish a joint stock company that offers its shares for public subscription during the establishment phase or is listed on the financial market.
The payment of the value of the subscribed shares shall be deposited in the name of the company under incorporation with one of the licensed banks in the Kingdom, and may only be disposed of by the Board of Directors after the company is registered with the Commercial Register.
If the company is not registered with the Commercial Registry, the subscribers may recover the amounts they have paid, and the banks in which they were subscribed shall promptly refund to each subscriber the amount he paid, and the founders shall be jointly liable for the fulfillment of this obligation and compensation, if necessary, in the face of the subscribers, and the founders shall bear all expenses incurred in the establishment of the company and shall be jointly liable in the face of third parties for acts and behaviors that they issued during the period of incorporation.
The company shall be considered a validly incorporated company after it is registered with the Commercial Registry, and thereafter no claim of invalidity of the company shall be heard for any violation of the provisions of the Law or the provisions of the company's Articles of Association.
If in-kind shares are offered upon the incorporation of the company or upon increasing its capital, these shares must be evaluated by one or more certified appraisers, and the appraiser must prepare a report indicating the fair value of the class of shares. This report shall be presented to the founders or the Extraordinary General Assembly, as the case may be, for deliberation, and the providers of in-kind shares shall not participate in voting on the decision regarding the report prepared for them. If the founders or assembly decide to reduce the consideration specified for the in-kind shares, the approval of the providers of these shares must be obtained for this reduction.
The period between the issuance of the certified appraiser's report estimating the fair value of the in-kind shares and the issuance of shares in exchange for those shares shall not exceed the period specified by regulations.
The joint stock company shall be managed by a board of directors, whose members shall not be less than three.
Each shareholder has the right to nominate himself or herself or one or more other shareholders or non-shareholders to be a member of the board of directors of the joint stock company.
The Ordinary General Assembly elects the members of the Board of Directors of the company, and in all cases, the members of the Board of Directors must be natural persons.
The bylaws specify the voting method in electing the members of the board of directors of the joint stock company.
The Company's Articles of Association may specify the composition of the Board of Directors in accordance with the regulations.
The Company's Articles of Association shall specify the term of membership of the Board of Directors, which shall not exceed (four) years, and the members of the Board of Directors may be re-elected, unless otherwise stipulated in the Company's Articles of Association.
However, the Ordinary General Assembly may remove all or some of the members of the Board of Directors, even if the Company's Articles of Association stipulate otherwise, and in this case the Ordinary General Assembly shall elect a new Board of Directors or someone to replace the removed member, as the case may be - in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
The competent authority may set the rules for the removal of board members by the Ordinary General Assembly.
The Board of Directors shall convene the Ordinary General Assembly sufficiently in advance of the end of its session to elect a new Board of Directors for a new session.
If the election cannot be held and the current board's session ends, its members shall continue to perform their duties until the election of a new board of directors for a new session, provided that the duration of the members of the outgoing board shall not exceed the period specified by the bylaws.
If the Chairman and members of the Board of Directors retire, they shall convene the Ordinary General Assembly to elect a new Board of Directors, and the retirement shall not take effect until the election of the new Board, provided that the duration of the retiring Board shall not exceed the period specified by the Bylaws.
A member of the Board of Directors may retire from membership of the Board by written notification addressed to the Chairman of the Board, and if the Chairman of the Board retires, the notification must be addressed to the other members of the Board and the Secretary of the Board, and in both cases, the retirement shall be effective from the date specified in the notification.
Unless otherwise stipulated in the Articles of Association, if the position of one of the members of the Board of Directors of the joint stock company is vacant due to his death or retirement and this vacancy does not result in a violation of the conditions necessary for the validity of the meeting of the Board due to the lack of the number of its members below the minimum number stipulated in the Law or the Articles of Association, the Board may appoint - temporarily - in the vacant position a person who is experienced and competent. The Board may temporarily appoint to the vacant position whoever is experienced and competent, provided that it informs the Commercial Register, as well as the Authority if the company is listed on the financial market, within (fifteen) days from the date of appointment, and that the appointment is presented to the Ordinary General Assembly at its first meeting, and the appointed member completes the term of his predecessor.
If the conditions necessary for the validity of the Board of Directors are not met due to the lack of the number of its members below the minimum number stipulated in the Law or the Company's Articles of Association, the remaining members shall convene the Ordinary General Assembly within (sixty) days to elect the necessary number of members.
In the event that the Board of Directors is not elected for a new term or completes the necessary number of Board members, in accordance with paragraphs (1), (2) and (5) of this Article, any interested party may request the competent judicial authority to appoint an experienced and competent person, in the number it deems appropriate, to supervise the management of the Company and call the General Assembly to convene within ninety days to elect a new Board of Directors or complete the necessary number of Board members as the case may be, or to request the dissolution of the Company.
The General Assembly may, upon the recommendation of the Board of Directors, terminate the membership of any member who fails to attend (three) consecutive meetings or (five) separate meetings during the term of his membership without a legitimate excuse provided by the Board of Directors.
Subject to the provisions of Article (27) of the Law, a member of the Board of Directors shall, as soon as he becomes aware of any interest, whether direct or indirect, in the works and contracts that are for the account of the Company, inform the Board of Directors of this fact, and this notification shall be recorded in the minutes of the Board of Directors' meeting when it meets.
This member may not participate in voting on the decision made in this regard in the Council and General Assemblies.
The Board shall inform the General Assembly when it is convened about the business and contracts in which the Board member has a direct or indirect interest, and a special report from the company's auditor prepared in accordance with the auditing standards adopted in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia shall be attached to the report.
If the Board member fails to disclose his interest referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article, the Company or any interested party may claim before the competent judicial authority to annul the contract or oblige the member to pay any profit or benefit accrued to him therefrom.
Liability for damages resulting from the acts and contracts referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article shall be borne by the member with an interest in the act or contract, and by the members of the Board of Directors when they fail or neglect to fulfill their obligations in violation of the provisions of this paragraph or if such acts and contracts are proven to be unfair or involve a conflict of interest and cause harm to the shareholders.
Members of the Board of Directors who oppose the resolution shall be exempt from liability if they expressly state their objection in the minutes of the meeting. Absence from the meeting at which the resolution is issued shall not be considered a reason for exemption from liability unless it is proven that the absent member did not know about the resolution or was unable to object to it after learning about it.
A joint stock company may not make a loan of any kind to any of its directors, nor may it make any guarantees or provide any guarantees in relation to a loan made by any of them with a third party.
This applies to any loan, guarantee, or warranty given to any of his relatives.
Any contract made in contravention of this is void.
The company has the right to demand compensation from the violator before the competent judicial authority to compensate for any damage it may suffer.
Paragraph (1) of this Article shall not apply to the following:
Banks and other finance companies may, within the limits of their purposes and the terms and conditions they follow in their dealings with the public, lend to a member of their board of directors, open a line of credit for him, or guarantee him in the loans he enters into with third parties.
Loans and guarantees granted by the company according to programs that serve its employees that have been approved in accordance with the provisions of the company's articles of association or by a decision of the General Assembly.
The competent authority may specify the cases and controls in which the company may not provide a loan or a guarantee related to a loan to any of its shareholders.
The shareholder exercises control over the Board of Directors in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
 A shareholder may not interfere in the work of the board of directors or the executive management of the company unless he is a member of its board of directors or works in its executive management, or his intervention is through the General Assembly and in accordance with its terms of reference.
The Board of Directors may contract loans of any duration, sell or mortgage the Company's assets, sell or mortgage the Company's commercial premises, or discharge the Company's debtors from their obligations, unless the Company's Articles of Association or a General Assembly resolution restricts the powers of the Board of Directors in this regard.
The Board of Directors is required to obtain the approval of the General Assembly when selling the assets of the company whose value exceeds (fifty percent) of the value of its total assets, whether the sale is made through one transaction or several transactions, and in this case the transaction that leads to exceeding (fifty percent) of the value of the assets is considered the transaction for which the General Assembly's approval is required, and this percentage is calculated from the date of the first transaction made during the previous (twelve) months.
The competent authority may exempt certain acts and behaviors from the provisions of this Article.
The company's articles of association shall specify the method of remuneration for the members of the Board of Directors, and this remuneration may be a certain amount, an attendance allowance for meetings, benefits in kind, or a certain percentage of the net profits, and may combine two or more of the above, and the articles of association may also specify the upper limit of such remuneration.
 The Ordinary General Assembly determines the amount of these bonuses, provided that the bonuses are fair, motivating and commensurate with the member's performance and the company's performance.
The regulations shall specify the necessary controls to implement this paragraph.
The Board of Directors' report to the Annual General Meeting must include a comprehensive statement of all the remuneration, attendance allowance, expense allowance, and other benefits that each member of the Board of Directors received or is entitled to receive during the fiscal year.
It must also include a statement of what the board members received as workers or administrators or what they received for technical or administrative work or consultations, as well as a statement of the number of board sessions and the number of sessions attended by each member.
Subject to the powers of the General Assembly, the Board of Directors shall have the broadest powers in managing the Company in order to achieve its objectives, except for any acts or actions that are excluded by a special provision in the Articles of Association or the Company's Articles of Association, which fall within the jurisdiction of the General Assembly.
The Board may also, within the limits of its powers, authorize one or more of its members or third parties to carry out certain work or actions.
The Company shall be bound by all acts and deeds performed by the Board of Directors on its behalf, even if they are outside its jurisdiction, unless the person who dealt with him was in bad faith or knew that such acts were outside the Board's jurisdiction.
Subject to the Company's Articles of Association, the Board of Directors of a joint stock company shall appoint, at its first meeting, from among its members, a Chairman of the Board, and may appoint a Managing Director or Chief Executive Officer.
The company's articles of association outline their specialties and powers.
If the company's articles of association do not provide for the distribution of powers, the board of directors will do so.
The Board of Directors of a listed joint stock company shall appoint, at its first meeting, a Vice Chairman from among its members.
A vice president may be appointed in an unlisted joint stock company.
The board of directors of a joint stock company shall appoint a chief executive officer from among its members or others, and the board shall determine his powers and remuneration if the company's articles of association do not include provisions in this regard.
The Board of Directors in a joint stock company shall appoint a secretary from among its members or others, and the Board shall determine his terms of reference and remuneration if the company's articles of association do not include provisions in this regard.
The Board of Directors may remove the Chairman, Vice Chairman, Managing Director, Chief Executive Officer, Secretary, or any of them from these positions, but this does not entail removing them from their membership on the Board.
Without prejudice to the powers of the Board of Directors set forth in the Articles of Association and the Company's Articles of Association, the Chairman of the Board of Directors shall represent the shareholding company before the judiciary, arbitration bodies and third parties, and the Company's Articles of Association may stipulate that the Managing Director or Chief Executive Officer shall have the authority to represent the Company.
The Chairman of the Board of Directors of a joint stock company may delegate, by written decision, some of his powers to other members of the Board or third parties to carry out certain work or actions, unless the company's articles of association stipulate otherwise.
The Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors replaces the Chairman of the Board of Directors in his absence in cases where the Board of Directors has a Vice Chairman.
The Board of Directors of a joint stock company shall meet at least (four) times a year at the invitation of its Chairman in accordance with the conditions stipulated in the company's Articles of Association, and the competent authority may amend the limit stipulated in this paragraph.
The Chairman of the Board must convene the Board whenever any member of the Board requests it in writing to discuss any one or more topics.
A meeting of the board of directors of a joint stock company shall not be valid unless at least half of the members are present, unless the company's articles of association stipulate a higher percentage.
Unless otherwise stipulated in the company's Articles of Association, the decisions of the Board of Directors of the joint stock company shall be issued by a majority of the votes of the members present (whether in person or by proxy), and in case of equality of votes, the side with which the chairman of the meeting voted shall prevail.
The Board of Directors determines the place of holding its meetings, which may be held using modern technology.
A member of the board of directors of a joint stock company may not delegate others to attend the board meetings or to vote on the board's decisions.
Except for this, a member of the Board of Directors may deputize any of the members if provided for in the Company's Articles of Association, provided that a deputy member may not have more than one deputation.
The decision of the Board of Directors of the joint stock company shall take effect from the date of its issuance, unless it stipulates that it shall take effect at another time or when certain conditions are met.
The Board of Directors of a joint stock company may issue its decisions on urgent matters by presenting them to all members by passing them, unless one of the members requests - in writing - a meeting of the Board to deliberate on them.
Unless the company's articles of association stipulate a higher percentage or number, such resolutions shall be passed by a majority vote of its members, unless the company's articles of association stipulate a higher percentage or number.
These decisions shall be presented to the Board at the first meeting of the next meeting to be recorded in the minutes of that meeting.
The deliberations and decisions of the board of directors of the joint stock company shall be recorded in minutes prepared by the secretary and signed by the chairman of the meeting, the board members present, and the secretary.
The minutes shall be recorded in a special register signed by the chairman and the secretary.
Modern technology may be used to sign and record deliberations, decisions, and minutes.
The shareholders' general assembly meeting shall be chaired by the Chairman of the Board of Directors or his deputy in his absence, or whoever is delegated by the Board of Directors from among its members in their absence, and if this is not possible, the general assembly shall be chaired by whoever the shareholders delegate from the Board members or from others by voting.
Every shareholder has the right to attend the General Assembly meeting, even if the company's articles of association stipulate otherwise, and he may delegate another person who is not a member of the Board of Directors.
The General Assembly meeting may be held and the shareholder may participate in the deliberations and vote on the resolutions by means of modern technology.
The Extraordinary General Assembly may, in addition to the powers assigned to it under the provisions of the Law, pass resolutions on matters that are already within the powers of the Ordinary General Assembly, under the same terms and conditions as those prescribed for the Ordinary General Assembly.
The Annual General Assembly shall be held at least once during the (six) months following the end of the company's fiscal year.
Other Ordinary General Assemblies may be called whenever the need arises.
The agenda of the Ordinary General Assembly at its annual meeting must include the following items:
Review and discuss the Board of Directors' report for the past fiscal year.
Review and discuss the financial statements for the past fiscal year.
Discuss the auditor's report for the past fiscal year, if any, and take a decision on it.
Deciding on the Board of Directors' proposals for dividends, if any.
The requirement to hold an Annual Ordinary General Assembly shall be fulfilled by holding an Extraordinary General Assembly within the six (6) months following the end of the Company's financial year and by including in its agenda the items listed in paragraph (2) of this Article.
If the decision of the General Assembly would modify the rights of a certain category of shareholders, the decision shall not be effective unless it is ratified by those shareholders who have the right to vote and are gathered in a special assembly in accordance with the provisions prescribed for convening the Extraordinary General Assembly and issuing its resolutions.
General and Special Assemblies shall be convened at the invitation of the Board of Directors, in accordance with the conditions stipulated in the Company's Articles of Association.
The Board of Directors shall convene the Ordinary General Assembly within (thirty) days from the date of the auditor's request or one or more shareholders representing at least ten percent of the company's shares with voting rights, and the auditor may call the Ordinary General Assembly to convene if the Board does not issue the invitation within (thirty) days from the date of the auditor's request.
The request referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article must specify the items on which the shareholders are required to vote.
The Ordinary General Assembly may be convened by a decision of the competent authority in the following cases
If the period specified for convening the Ordinary General Assembly in paragraph (1) of Article Eighty-Eight of the Law has elapsed without convening the Ordinary General Assembly.
If there are violations of the provisions of the law or the company's articles of association, or a malfunction in the management of the company, including the lack of the number of board members below the minimum number for the validity of its meeting.
If the Board fails to convene the Ordinary General Assembly within the period specified in paragraph (1) of this Article from the date of the auditor's request or one or more shareholders representing at least ten percent of the Company's shares with voting rights.
The competent authority may take the necessary measures to convene the Ordinary General Assembly, and may preside over the meeting if it is not possible to preside over it in accordance with the provision of paragraph 1 of Article 84 of the Law.
The call for the convening of the Assembly shall be made at least twenty-one (21) days before the date set for it ( at least twenty-one (21) days in accordance with the regulations specified by the bylaws, subject to the following:
Informing shareholders by registered letters to their addresses in the shareholders' register, or announcing the invitation through modern technology.
Send a copy of the invitation and agenda to the Commercial Registry, and a copy to the CMA if the company is listed on the Capital Market on the date of the invitation announcement.
The invitation to the meeting must include at least the following:
Explain who has the right to attend the assembly meeting and the right to represent a person of his choice who is not a member of the board of directors, and explain the shareholder's right to discuss the topics on the assembly's agenda, ask questions, and how to exercise the right to vote.
Place, date, and time of the meeting.
The type of organization, whether public or private.
The agenda of the meeting including the items for which the shareholders' vote is required.
The shareholders of an unlisted joint stock company representing all the company's shares with voting rights may convene a general assembly, without observing the conditions and periods prescribed for the invitation, to consider the matters on which the general assembly is competent to decide.
The Ordinary General Assembly meeting shall not be valid unless it is attended by shareholders representing at least (one quarter) of the company's shares with voting rights, unless the company's articles of association stipulate a higher percentage, provided that it does not exceed (half).
If the quorum required to hold the Ordinary General Assembly meeting in accordance with paragraph (1) of this Article is not met, a second meeting shall be called to be held under the same conditions stipulated in Article (91) of the Law within thirty (30) days following the date set for the previous meeting.
However, the second meeting may be held one hour after the expiration of the time limit set for the first meeting, provided that this is authorized by the company's Articles of Association, and the invitation to the first meeting includes a statement that the meeting can be held.
In all cases, the second meeting will be valid regardless of the number of shares with voting rights represented.
Ordinary General Assembly resolutions are passed with the approval of the majority of voting rights represented at the meeting.
The Extraordinary General Assembly meeting shall not be valid unless attended by shareholders holding at least (half) of the company's shares with voting rights, unless the company's Articles of Association stipulate a higher percentage, provided that it does not exceed (two-thirds).
If the quorum required to hold an Extraordinary General Assembly meeting is not met in accordance with paragraph (1) of this Article, a second meeting shall be called to be held under the same conditions stipulated in Article (Ninety-one) of the Law, however, the second meeting may be held one hour after the expiration of the period specified for holding the first meeting, provided that the invitation to hold the first meeting includes an indication that the meeting can be held.
In all cases, the second meeting shall be valid if attended by shareholders holding at least one quarter of the company's shares with voting rights.
If there is no quorum to hold the second meeting, a third meeting shall be called under the same conditions stipulated in Article (Ninety-first) of the Law, and the third meeting shall be valid regardless of the number of shares with voting rights represented therein.
The resolutions of the Extraordinary General Assembly shall be issued with the approval of (two-thirds) of the voting rights represented at the meeting, except if the resolution relates to increasing or reducing the capital, extending the term of the company, dissolving it before the expiration of the period specified in its articles of association, merging it with another company, or dividing it into two or more companies, it shall be valid only if issued with the approval of (three-fourths) of the voting rights represented at the meeting.
The Board of Directors shall register with the Commercial Registry the resolutions of the Extraordinary General Assembly specified by the regulations within (fifteen) days from the date of their issuance.
The decision of the General Assembly of the Joint Stock Company shall be effective from the date of its issuance, except in cases where the Law, the Company's Articles of Association, or the issued decision stipulates that it shall be effective at another time or when certain conditions are met.
The company's articles of association outline the method of voting at the shareholders' assembly.
Members of the Board of Directors may not participate in voting on Assembly resolutions that relate to businesses and contracts in which they have a direct or indirect interest or that involve a conflict of interest.
When preparing the agenda for the General Assembly, the Board of Directors must take into account the topics that shareholders wish to include.
One or more shareholders owning at least ten percent of the company's shares with voting rights have the right to add one or more topics to the agenda when it is prepared, and the competent authority may amend this percentage.
The Board of Directors shall separate each of the topics on the agenda of the General Assembly into a separate item, not to combine substantially different topics under one item, and not to place business and contracts in which any of the Board members has a direct or indirect interest under one item for the purpose of voting on the item as a whole.
Every shareholder has the right to discuss the topics included in the agenda of the General Assembly and ask questions about them to the members of the Board of Directors and the auditor.
Any provision in the company's articles of association that deprives the shareholder of this right is null and void.
The board of directors or the auditor will answer questions from shareholders to the extent that they do not jeopardize the company's interest.
If a shareholder considers that the answer to his question is insufficient, he may appeal to the General Assembly, and its decision in this regard shall be enforceable.
The meeting shall be recorded in a minutes that includes the number of shareholders present in person or by proxy, the number of shares held by them in person or by proxy, the number of votes cast, the resolutions adopted, the number of votes approved or opposed, and a brief summary of the discussions that took place at the meeting.
The minutes shall be recorded regularly after each meeting in a special register signed by the president of the association, its secretary and vote collectors, and the competent authority may establish regulations regarding the minutes of association meetings and the duties of its secretaries and vote collectors.
If a joint stock company is established by one person, or if all its shares are transferred to one person, this person shall have the powers and authorities of the shareholders' assemblies stipulated in this section, and its decisions shall be issued in writing, without the need to call the general assembly, and these decisions shall be recorded in the special register stipulated in Article (Ninety-seven) of the Law.
Without prejudice to the rights of bona fide third parties, any shareholder may apply to the competent judicial authority to invalidate the decision of the Shareholders' Assembly issued in violation of the provisions of the Law or the Company's Articles of Association, if he objects to it during the meeting or is absent from it with an acceptable excuse, and the invalidity case shall not be heard after ninety (90) days from the date the decision was issued.
In order to file the lawsuit referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article, the plaintiff must be a shareholder in the company during the filing of the lawsuit and during all its proceedings.
It may be stipulated in the company's Articles of Association that the Chairman of the Board of Directors of the unlisted shareholding company may propose a General Assembly resolution to be submitted to the shareholders by passing it, without the need to convene it, unless any of the shareholders request - in writing - a General Assembly meeting to deliberate on it.
However, in order to pass General Assembly resolutions related to the election and removal of the Company's Board of Directors, the appointment and removal of the Company's auditor, if any, and the review and discussion of the financial statements for the past fiscal year, the General Assembly must be convened in accordance with the relevant provisions.
For the validity of the resolution proposed to be issued in accordance with paragraph (1) of this Article, the Company shall send it together with the relevant documents to all shareholders, indicating what the shareholder must follow to approve it and the date by which it must be issued.
General Assembly resolutions are passed in unlisted shareholding companies in accordance with the following mechanism:
With respect to resolutions that fall within the jurisdiction of the Ordinary General Assembly: Issued with the approval of one or more shareholders representing a majority of the voting rights, unless the Company's Articles of Association stipulates a higher percentage.
With respect to a resolution that falls within the jurisdiction of the Extraordinary General Assembly: Issued with the approval of one or more shareholders representing at least (seventy-five percent) of the voting rights, unless the company's Articles of Association stipulate a higher percentage.
General Assembly resolutions passed in accordance with paragraph (1) of this Article shall be recorded in minutes and entered in the special register stipulated in Article (97) of the Law.
One or more shareholders representing at least five percent of the company's capital may submit a request to the competent judicial authority to inspect the company if the actions of the members of the board of directors or the auditor in the company's affairs appear suspicious.
The competent judicial authority may order the inspection at the expense of the applicant, after a session in which the members of the board of directors or the auditor are notified to hear their statements, and may, if necessary, require the applicant to provide a guarantee if the company requests it.
If the competent judicial authority proves the validity of the complaint, it may order whatever precautionary measures it deems appropriate, call the General Assembly to take the necessary decisions, dismiss the members of the Board of Directors and the auditor, appoint someone to supervise the management of the company with experience and competence and the number of people it deems appropriate, and call the General Assembly to convene to elect a new Board of Directors.
The competent judicial authority determines the limits of their powers and the duration of their work.
The shares of the joint stock company shall be nominal and indivisible in the face of the company. If the share is owned by multiple persons, they must choose one of them to represent them in the use of the rights related to it, and these persons shall be jointly responsible for the obligations arising from the ownership of the share.
The company's articles of association determine the nominal value of its shares, and shares of the same type or class are of equal nominal value.
Subject to paragraph (2) of this Article, shares may be divided into shares with a lower nominal value, or merged to represent shares with a higher nominal value, and the competent authority may set the necessary controls for this.
The unlisted shareholding company is obligated to issue a paper or electronic certificate proving the shareholder's ownership of the share.
