Subscribing to or owning shares indicates the shareholder's acceptance of the Articles of Association and his commitment to the resolutions issued by the shareholders' assemblies in accordance with the provisions of the Articles of Association and the Articles of Association, whether he is present or absent, and whether he agrees or disagrees with these resolutions.
Company shares are issued in exchange for shares in cash or in kind.
The value of shares issued in exchange for cash dividends must not be less than (one-fourth) of their nominal value specified in the company's articles of association, and the paper or electronic share certificate of the unlisted shareholding company shall indicate the amount of its value.
In all cases, the balance of this value must be paid within (five) years from the date of issuance of the shares.
Shares representing shares in kind are issued after their full value has been satisfied, and are delivered to their owners only after full ownership of these shares has been transferred to the company.
Shares may not be issued for less than their nominal value, but they may be issued for more than this value if the company's articles of association stipulate this or the Extraordinary General Assembly approves it, in which case the difference in value shall be placed in a separate item within the shareholders' rights, and the regulations shall specify the controls for its use.
The shareholder has rights related to the share, including the right to dispose of it, the right to attend shareholders' assemblies, participate in their deliberations, vote on their resolutions, the right to receive a share of the net profits to be distributed, the right to elect members of the Board of Directors, the right to inspect the company's records and documents without prejudice to the confidentiality of information, monitor the work of the Board of Directors, file a liability suit against the Board members, challenge the invalidity of the resolutions of the shareholders' assemblies and the right to receive a portion of the company's assets upon liquidation under the conditions and restrictions set forth in the Law or the company's Articles of Association.
The types of shares that a company may issue are divided into: Common shares, preferred shares, and redeemable shares.
The company's articles of association may provide for different classes of share types and grant certain rights or privileges or place restrictions on some of those classes.
Shares of the same type or class shall carry equal rights and obligations, and each type or class of shares shall have the rights related to it in accordance with the company's Articles of Association.
Regulations specify the types and classes of shares that may be issued.
In cases where the Company has shares of different types or classes, one type or class may be converted into another if the Company's Articles of Association so provide.
The conversion of one type or class of shares to another requires the approval of the Extraordinary General Assembly.
 This excludes cases where the resolution to issue shares provides for their automatic conversion to another type or class when certain conditions are met or after a specified period of time has elapsed.
The provisions contained in Article (101/10) of the Law shall apply in cases where the transfer of shares entails modifying or canceling the rights or obligations related to the type or class of share.
Neither the ordinary shares nor the preference shares nor any class of them may be converted into redeemable shares or any of their classes; except with the approval of all the shareholders of the company.
The regulations shall specify the controls for implementing the provisions of this Article and how to deal with the effects, rights and obligations of the shares before or after the transfer.
If the Company's shares are of different types and classes or the Company's Articles of Association authorize the issuance of different types and classes of shares, the amendment or cancellation of any of the rights, obligations or restrictions relating to the shares, or the conversion of any type or class of shares to another type or class if this results in the amendment or cancellation of the rights or obligations relating to the type or class of shares to be converted, or the issuance of shares of a particular type or class that results in prejudice to the rights of another class of shareholders shall require to the type or class of shares to be converted, or to issue shares of a particular type or class that would prejudice the rights of another class of shareholders, the approval of a special assembly formed in accordance with Article (89) of the Law from the shareholders who are affected by such amendment, cancellation, conversion or issuance, and the approval of the Extraordinary General Assembly shall be required.
If the Company's shares include preference shares or redeemable shares, no new shares may be issued that have priority over any of their classes without the approval of a special assembly formed in accordance with Article (89) of the Law from the shareholders who are affected by such issuance.
- The Authority may set restrictions related to the trading of shares in shareholding companies that wish to list their shares on the financial market.
2. The company's articles of association may provide for restrictions relating to the trading of shares, including the right to request the redemption of shares for shareholders, provided in all cases that this shall not result in an absolute prohibition of such trading.
The unlisted shareholding company shall prepare a special register of shareholders' names, nationalities, data, places of residence and professions, the number of shares owned by each of them, the numbers of shares and the amount paid, and the company may contract to prepare this register, and it must be kept in the Kingdom.
The Company shall provide the Commercial Registry with the data of the register referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article and any amendment thereto within fifteen (15) days from the date of registration of the Company with the Commercial Registry or from the date of the amendment, as the case may be.
Without prejudice to the Capital Market Law, the company's articles of association may provide, after the approval of shareholders representing at least ninety percent of the company's shares with voting rights, as follows:
The majority shareholders have the power to bind the minority shareholders to accept an offer from a bona fide buyer to purchase all the company's shares at the same price, terms and conditions as the purchase of the majority shares.
The minority shareholders may bind the majority to guarantee the sale of the minority shares in cases where the majority sells their shares at the same price, terms and conditions as the sale of the majority shares.
The Company may purchase or pledge its shares if its Articles of Association authorizes this, and the shares purchased by the Company shall not have votes in the shareholders' assemblies.
Shares may be mortgaged, and the mortgaged creditor may receive dividends and use the rights related to the share, unless otherwise agreed in the mortgage contract.
The mortgage creditor may not attend or vote in the shareholders' assembly meetings.
Regulations shall specify the controls necessary to implement the provisions of this article.
If the shareholder fails to pay the remainder of the share value on the specified dates, the Board of Directors may - after informing him in the ways prescribed in the Company's Articles of Association or informing him by registered letter or by any means of modern technology - sell the share at a public auction or the stock market, as the case may be - to sell the share at a public auction or the stock market, as the case may be.
The company's articles of association may stipulate that other shareholders have priority in purchasing the defaulting shareholder's shares.
From the proceeds of the sale, the company realizes the amounts owed to it and returns the rest to the shareholder.
If the sale proceeds are insufficient to fulfill these amounts, the company may recover the rest from all the shareholder's funds.
The enforcement of the rights related to the shares whose value is defaulted on the expiration of the due date shall be suspended until they are sold or paid in accordance with the provision of paragraph (1) of this Article, including the right to receive a share of the net profits to be distributed and the right to attend assemblies and vote on their resolutions.
However, a shareholder who fails to pay until the day of sale may pay the value owed to him plus the expenses spent by the company in this regard, in which case the shareholder shall have the right to request to receive the dividends to be distributed.
The Company shall cancel the share certificate sold in accordance with the provisions of this Article, give the purchaser a new share certificate with the same number, and indicate in the shareholders' register that the sale has taken place with the necessary data of the new owner.
The company may not require the shareholder to pay more than the amount he committed to at the time of issuing the share, even if the company's articles of association stipulate this.
In accordance with the Capital Market Law, a joint stock company may issue debt instruments or negotiable financing instruments.
In order for a company to issue debt instruments or financing instruments convertible into shares, a resolution must be passed by the Extraordinary General Assembly stating the maximum number of shares that may be issued against such instruments or sukuk, whether such instruments or sukuk are issued simultaneously, through a series of issues, or through one or more issuance programs.
The Board of Directors shall, without the need for a new approval from this Assembly, issue new shares against those instruments or instruments whose holders request their conversion immediately upon the expiration of the conversion request period specified for the holders of such instruments or instruments, or upon the fulfillment of the conditions for their automatic conversion into shares or upon the expiration of the period specified for such conversion, and the Board shall take the necessary measures to amend the Company's Articles of Association regarding the number of shares issued and the capital.
The Board of Directors must record the completion of the procedures for each capital increase with the Commercial Register.
The Company may convert debt instruments or financing instruments into shares in accordance with the Capital Market Law, with the consent of the holder, whether by prior consent, such as as part of the terms of issue, or by subsequent agreement.
Any interested party may request the competent judicial authority to annul the act done in violation of the provisions of Articles (107.17) or (118.18) of the Law, in addition to compensating the holders of debt instruments or financial instruments for the damage they have suffered.
Resolutions of shareholders' assemblies apply to holders of debt instruments and financing instruments.
However, these associations may not modify the rights established for them except with the consent of the members in a special assembly convened in accordance with the provisions of Article (89) of the Law.Bottom of Form
At the end of each fiscal year, the Board of Directors must prepare the company's financial statements and a report on its activity and financial status for the past fiscal year.
The Board makes these documents available to the auditor, if any, at least forty-five (45) days prior to the date set for the Annual General Assembly.
The documents referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article shall be signed by the Company's Chairman of the Board of Directors, its Chief Executive Officer, and its Chief Financial Officer, if any, and copies shall be deposited at the Company's head office at the disposal of the shareholders.
The Chairman of the Board of Directors shall provide the shareholders with the Company's financial statements and the report of the Board of Directors, after signing them, and the auditor's report, if any, unless published in any of the modern technical means, at least twenty-one (21) days before the date set for the Annual Ordinary General Assembly, and shall also deposit these documents as prescribed by the regulations.
The company's articles of association may stipulate that a certain percentage of the net profits shall be set aside to form a reserve for the purposes specified in the articles of association.
The competent authority may set the rules for the formation of reserves.
When determining the share of shares in the net profits, the Ordinary General Assembly may decide to form other reserves, to the extent that achieves the interest of the company or ensures the distribution of stable profits, as far as possible, to the shareholders.
The said association may also deduct amounts from the net profits to fulfill social purposes for the company's employees.
The earmarked reserve may only be used for purposes specified in the company's Articles of Association by a resolution of the Extraordinary General Assembly.
If this reserve is not earmarked for a specific purpose, the Ordinary General Assembly, based on the proposal of the Board of Directors, may decide to spend it for the benefit of the company or the shareholders. The competent authority may set regulations for the use of reserves.
The Ordinary General Assembly may use retained earnings and distributable reserves to pay the remaining amount of the share value or part thereof, provided that this does not prejudice justice among the shareholders in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
The General Assembly determines the percentage to be distributed to shareholders from the net profits after deducting the reserves, if any.
The shareholder is entitled to his share in the profits in accordance with the General Assembly resolution issued in this regard, and the resolution indicates the due date and the date of distribution.
Dividend eligibility will be for shareholders registered in the shareholders' records at the end of the due date.
The regulations specify the maximum period during which the Board of Directors must implement the decision of the General Assembly regarding the distribution of dividends to shareholders.
The capital is increased in one of the following ways
Issuing new shares in exchange for cash or in-kind shares.
The issuance of new shares against the company's debts of a certain amount, current performance, with the approval of the relevant creditors.
Provided that the issuance shall be at the value decided by the Extraordinary General Assembly after seeking the opinion of one or more accredited experts or evaluators, and after the Board of Directors prepares a statement on the origin and amount of these debts, and the Board members sign this statement and are responsible for its correctness, and a report from the company's auditor is attached.
Issuing new shares in the amount of the reserve that the Extraordinary General Assembly decides to incorporate into the capital, and these shares must be issued in the same form and conditions as the issued shares of the same type or class, and these shares shall be distributed to the shareholders without consideration in proportion to their respective holdings of the original shares.
Issuing new shares in exchange for debt instruments.
The Extraordinary General Assembly may decide to increase the company's issued or authorized capital, if any, provided that the issued capital has been paid in full.
The capital does not have to be fully paid up if the unpaid portion of the capital relates to shares issued in exchange for the conversion of debt instruments or financing instruments into shares and the conversion period has not yet expired.
The Extraordinary General Assembly may, in all cases, allocate the shares issued upon capital increase or part of them to employees of the company and subsidiaries or some of them.
Shareholders may not exercise the right of first refusal when the company issues shares allocated to employees.
The competent authority may set the controls and procedures for allocating shares to employees of the company and/or subsidiaries.
In all cases, the nominal value of the incremental shares must be equal to the nominal value of the original shares of the same type or class.
At the time of the issuance of the Extraordinary General Assembly resolution approving the increase of the issued capital or the decision of the Board of Directors approving its increase within the limits of the authorized capital, the shareholder who owns the share shall have priority in subscribing to the new shares issued in exchange for cash shares, and shall be informed of his priority - if any - by a registered letter to his address in the shareholders' register, or through modern technical means, and of the capital increase resolution, the conditions and manner of subscription, and its start and end date, taking into account the type of share class he owns.
The Extraordinary General Assembly has the right, if stipulated in the company's Articles of Association, to suspend the right of priority for shareholders to subscribe to the capital increase in exchange for cash shares or to grant the right of priority to non-shareholders in cases it deems to be in the best interest of the company.
A shareholder in a joint stock company may sell or assign the right of priority with or without material consideration as specified by the regulations.
The new shares shall be distributed to the priority rights holders who requested the subscription in proportion to their priority rights of the total rights resulting from the capital increase, provided that what they receive does not exceed what they requested of the new shares and in consideration of the type and class of share they own, and the remaining new shares shall be distributed to the priority rights holders who requested more than their share in proportion to their priority rights of the total rights resulting from the capital increase, provided that what they receive does not exceed what they requested of the new shares, and the remaining shares shall be offered to third parties, unless the Extraordinary General Assembly or the Capital Market Law stipulates otherwise.
If the shareholding company's losses reach (half) of the issued capital, the Board of Directors must disclose this and its recommendations regarding these losses within (sixty) days from the date it becomes aware of this amount, and invite the Extraordinary General Assembly to meet within (one hundred and eighty) days from the date it becomes aware to consider the continuation of the company while taking any of the necessary measures to address or dissolve these losses.
The capital is reduced in one of the following ways
Cancel a number of shares equal to the amount to be reduced.
Reducing the nominal value of the stock by canceling a portion of it equal to the loss suffered by the company.
Reducing the nominal value of the share by refunding part of it to the shareholder or by discharging him from all or part of the unpaid portion of the share's value.
The company buys a number of its shares equal to the amount to be reduced and then canceled.
The Extraordinary General Assembly may decide to reduce the capital if it exceeds the company's needs or if the company suffers losses.
In the latter case only, the capital may be reduced below the limit set forth in Article (59) of the Law.
The reduction decision shall be issued only after reading a statement at the General Assembly prepared by the Board of Directors on the reasons for the reduction, the company's obligations and the impact of the reduction on their fulfillment, and a report from the company's auditor shall be attached to this statement.
In cases where the General Assembly resolves to pass a resolution, the aforementioned statement may only be presented to the shareholders.
If the reduction of the capital as a result of its increase over the company's need, the creditors shall be invited to express their objections, if any, to the reduction at least forty-five (45) days before the date set for holding the Extraordinary General Assembly meeting to decide on the reduction, provided that the invitation shall be accompanied by a statement indicating the amount of the capital before and after the reduction, the date of the meeting and the effective date of the reduction. If any of the creditors object to the reduction and submit their documents to the company within the mentioned date, the company shall pay the debt if it is current or provide sufficient security to fulfill it if it is postponed.
A creditor who has notified the Company of his objection to the reduction and whose debt, if current, has not been satisfied, or a sufficient guarantee for its fulfillment, if it is postponed, may apply to the competent judicial authority before the date set for holding the Extraordinary General Assembly to take the reduction decision, and the competent judicial authority in this case shall order the debt to be satisfied or provide a sufficient guarantee or postpone the holding of the Extraordinary General Assembly meeting, as the case may be.
The reduction shall not be invoked by the creditor who submitted his request within the time stipulated in paragraph (1) of this Article unless he has satisfied what is due or obtained sufficient security to satisfy what is not due.
Equality between shareholders holding shares of the same type and class must be considered when reducing the capital.
If the capital reduction is by purchasing a number of the company's shares in order to cancel them, shareholders must be invited to offer their shares for sale by informing them of the company's desire to purchase the shares by registered letters to their addresses listed in the shareholders' register, or by announcing the invitation through modern technical means.
If the number of shares offered for sale exceeds the number of shares the company has decided to purchase, the sale orders must be reduced by the proportion of this increase.
The purchase price of shares of unlisted shareholding companies is estimated according to fair value, while shares of listed shareholding companies are purchased in accordance with the Capital Market Law.
Unless specifically provided for in this Chapter, and consistent with its nature, the provisions of the Joint Stock Company shall apply to the Simplified Joint Stock Company in Articles: (61), (63), (67) to (71), (74) to (88), (90) to (94), (95/1), (956) to (98), (100), (101), (101/100), (101/100/2), (111/100), (111/100), (121/100), (121/100) and (122/100).
The shareholders of a simplified joint stock company may regulate the company's structure and method of operation in the company's articles of association.
The shareholders replace the ordinary and extraordinary general assembly of the shareholding company, within the scope of the provisions that apply to the simplified shareholding company.
The shareholders may specify who will assume these powers in the company's articles of association, unless specifically provided for in this section.
The President, Director or Board of Directors of the Simplified Joint Stock Company, as the case may be, shall exercise all the powers assigned to the Chairman and members of the Board of Directors of the Joint Stock Company and replace them, unless specifically stipulated in this Chapter.
The company's articles of association shall specify the amount of its issued and paid-up capital, and may stipulate that this is an authorized capital.
The minimum capital requirement for a joint stock company does not apply to a simplified joint stock company.
The Articles of Association of a Simplified Joint Stock Company must include the following information:
Company name.
The company's headquarters.
The purpose of the company.
The company's issued and paid-up capital, if any.
The number of shares, their types and classes if any, the par value, and the rights associated with each type or class.
The duration of the company, if any.
Management of the company and the provisions thereof.
Assignment of shares.
Shareholders' meetings and the quorum required for their validity.
Shareholders' resolutions and the quorum required for their issuance.
The start and end date of the fiscal year.
Any other terms, conditions or statements that the founders or shareholders agree to include in the company's Articles of Association and that do not contradict the provisions of the Law.
The following must be attached to the Articles of Association when submitting an application for incorporation:
Names, addresses, and nationalities of the founders.
A statement of the expected business and expenses for setting up the company.
The founders' declaration of subscribing to all the company's shares and the amount paid.
A certificate of deposit of the paid-up portion of the issued capital with a licensed bank in the Kingdom.
A decision by the founders appointing the company's president, director, or board of directors, as the case may be, including their names, nationalities, addresses, and dates of birth.
The founders' declaration to comply with all the requirements of the law related to the establishment of the company.
A statement or report prepared by an accredited appraiser indicating the fair value of the in-kind shares (if any), and a declaration from the remaining founders agreeing to the specified consideration.
If in-kind shares are offered at the time of incorporation or when increasing the company's capital whose total value does not exceed (half) of the company's capital, they do not have to be evaluated by an authorized expert, unless the founders or shareholders agree otherwise.
If the value of the in-kind shares offered at the time of the company's incorporation or capital increase exceeds (half) of its capital, they must be evaluated by one or more accredited appraisers, and the appraiser must prepare a report indicating the fair value of these shares, and that report shall be presented to the founders or shareholders for deliberation, and the providers of the in-kind shares shall not participate in voting on the decision regarding the report prepared for them. If the founders or shareholders decide to reduce the consideration specified for the in-kind shares, the approval of the providers of these shares must be obtained for this reduction.
The period between the issuance of the certified appraiser's report estimating the fair value of the in-kind shares and the issuance of shares against those shares shall not exceed the period specified by the regulations.
If the in-kind shares are not valued by a certified appraiser in accordance with the provision of this Article or if they are valued other than by the appointed certified appraiser, the founders or shareholders shall be personally liable in all their assets against third parties for the fairness of the valuation of such shares and the payment of the difference in cash to the Company.
In this case, the lawsuit shall not be heard after the expiration of (five) years from the date of the company's registration in the Commercial Register or the increase of its capital, as the case may be.
The method of management of a simplified joint stock company shall be specified in its articles of association. It may be managed by a president, one or more directors, a board of directors, or others. The articles of association shall specify the method of appointment, removal, limits of authority, powers and method of work of the person managing the company, and if the articles of association do not contain provisions in this regard, the shareholders shall do so.
The president, director or board of directors of the simplified joint stock company, as the case may be, shall have the broadest powers in managing the company in order to achieve its objectives, except for any acts or actions that are excluded by a special provision in the articles of association or the company's articles of association, which fall within the competence of the shareholders, and the president or director - within the limits of his powers - may authorize others to perform one or more specific acts, and the board of directors - within the limits of its powers - may authorize one or more of its members or third parties to perform one or more specific acts.
The president, director or chairman of the simplified shareholding company, as the case may be, shall represent the company before the judiciary, arbitration bodies and third parties, and may authorize others to represent it if its articles of association so stipulate.
The Simplified Joint Stock Company shall be bound by all acts and dispositions performed by the President, Director or Board of Directors, as the case may be, on its behalf, even if they are outside his competencies, unless the person with whom he dealt was in bad faith or knew that such acts and dispositions were outside his competencies.
The provisions relating to the liability of the board of directors of a joint stock company shall apply to the president, director or board of directors of a simplified joint stock company, as the case may be.
The provisions of Article 72 of the Law shall apply to the president, director or board of directors of the simplified shareholding company, as the case may be.
The Articles of Association of the Simplified Joint Stock Company shall specify the matters to be submitted to the shareholders for decision, in the form and under the conditions specified in the said Articles of Association.
However, decisions within the competencies of the Ordinary or Extraordinary General Assembly of the joint stock company regarding the increase or decrease of the capital, transformation of the company into another form, merger, division, dissolution, appointment of the auditor, discussion of financial statements, distribution of profits, or amendment of the company's articles of association must be taken by the shareholders.
The quorum required for the validity of shareholders' meetings and resolutions shall be specified in the company's Articles of Association.
The company's articles of association may specify different quotas for certain matters when they are presented to the shareholders and decided upon.
The company's articles of association specify the matters for which unanimous shareholder approval is required to pass a resolution.
Subject to the Articles of Association, shareholders' meetings of a Simplified Joint Stock Company shall be held at the invitation of its Chairman, Director or Board of Directors as the case may be, in accordance with the conditions specified in the Articles of Association.
The shareholders' meeting may be called at the request of the auditor, if any, or one or more shareholders representing at least ten percent of the company's shares with voting rights.
The invitation to the meeting shall be sent to all shareholders at least five (5) days in advance, including the place, date and time of the meeting, and the agenda including the items on which the shareholders' votes are required.
The invitation may specify the place, date and time of the second meeting, in case the quorum required to hold the first meeting is not met.
Shareholders shall be informed of the invitation by registered letters sent to their addresses in the shareholders' register, or through modern technology, unless otherwise stipulated in the company's articles of association.
If the shareholders' meeting is called to consider the matters stipulated in paragraph (1) of Article (145) of the Law, every shareholder shall have the right to obtain and review the information and documents related thereto, at any time within five (5) days prior to the date set for the meeting, unless the company's Articles of Association stipulate a longer period.
Shareholders' meetings shall be held at the company's headquarters or any other place they specify, and may be held via modern technology.
Shareholders representing all of the company's shares with voting rights may hold their meeting without observing the conditions and periods prescribed for the invitation.
At the end of each fiscal year, the president, director or board of directors of the Simplified Shareholding Company, as the case may be, must prepare the company's financial statements and a report on its activity and financial status for the past fiscal year, including the proposed method of distributing profits, if any.
These documents and the auditor's report, if any, shall be presented to the shareholders within (six) months from the end of the company's fiscal year, and he shall deposit these documents in accordance with the regulations.
The deliberations of the shareholders' meeting and their resolutions, or the resolutions passed, shall be recorded in minutes in a special register signed by the company's president, director, or board of directors, as the case may be.
The company may use modern technology to prove and record the deliberations and decisions.
The president, director or board of directors of the company, as the case may be, shall register with the Commercial Registry the shareholders' resolutions specified by the regulations within fifteen days from the date of their issuance.
The company's articles of association may provide for a shareholders' resolution to be passed without the need for a shareholders' meeting.
In this case, the company's president, director or board of directors, as the case may be, will send the proposed resolution and related documents to all shareholders, indicating what the shareholder must do to approve it and the date by which it must be passed.
Unless the company's articles of association provide for another means of communication, the proposed resolution and related documents may be sent by any of the following means
Send them to shareholders by registered letters.
Delivery in person to the shareholders or their legal representative.
Send it by email or any of the modern technology.
The company's articles of association specify the quorum required for the validity of passing shareholder resolutions.
If the Simplified Joint Stock Company is established by one person, or if all of its shares belong to one person, the following applies:
This person's liability is limited to the amount of money he has allocated as the company's capital.
It shall have the powers and authorities of the shareholders stipulated in this section, and its decisions shall be issued in writing and recorded in a special register at the company.
