The company's articles of association may provide for restrictions on the disposal of shares relating to the following:
Prohibit their disposal for a period not exceeding (ten) years from the date of their issuance.
This period may be extended by a unanimous vote of the shareholders.
Requiring the approval of the company or shareholders before disposal.
Any disposition of shares made in violation of these restrictions is void.
Unless otherwise stipulated in the company's articles of association, the conditions for requiring a shareholder to surrender his shares may be stipulated in the company's articles of association, and the purchase price of the shares shall be valued at fair value.
The company's articles of association may stipulate that the rights related to that shareholder's shares - except for financial rights - are suspended until he waives them.
Except for criminal offenses, the company's articles of association may provide for the settlement of disputes or disagreements of whatever nature that may occur between shareholders or between the company and its president, director or any of its board members, as the case may be, by resorting to arbitration or other alternative means of settlement.
Unanimous shareholder approval is required to incorporate the provisions of Articles 151, 152, and 153 of the Articles of Association and any amendment to any of them into the Company's Articles of Association.
Regulations shall specify the provisions necessary to implement the provisions of this section.
Limited Liability Company: It is a company established by one or more natural or legal persons, and its liability is independent of the financial liability of each partner or owner.
 The company shall be solely responsible for the debts and obligations incurred by it or arising from its activity, and neither its owner nor its partner shall be liable for these debts and obligations except to the extent of their share in the capital.
If a limited liability company is formed by a single person, or if all of its shares are vested in a single person, the following applies:
This person shall have the powers and authorities of the Director, the Board of Directors of the Company and the General Assembly of the Partners stipulated in this Chapter, and his decisions shall be issued in writing and recorded in a special register with the Company.
This person may appoint one or more directors who shall be the representative of the company before the judiciary, arbitration bodies and third parties, and responsible for its management to the partner who owns the company's shares.
A one-person limited liability company shall have a Memorandum of Association, and any reference to the Memorandum of Association in the provisions applicable to a limited liability company shall mean the Memorandum of Association.
The LLC's Memorandum of Association must specifically include the following information:
Names of partners, and their details.
Company name.
The company's headquarters.
The purpose of the company.
The capital, and its distribution among the partners.
The partners acknowledge the fulfillment of the value of the shares.
The duration of the company, if any.
Management of the company.
Waiver of quotas.
The means by which the company may direct advertisements to partners.
Partner decisions.
How profits and losses are distributed among the partners.
The start and end date of the fiscal year.
Termination of the company.
Any other terms, conditions or statements that the partners agree to include in the company's memorandum of association and that do not conflict with the provisions of the Law.
The following must be attached to the Memorandum of Association when applying for incorporation:
The founders' declaration to comply with all the requirements of the law related to the incorporation of the company.
A statement or report prepared by one or more certified appraisers indicating the fair value of the in-kind shares, if any, and a declaration by the remaining founders agreeing to the specified consideration.
The valuation of in-kind shares shall follow the provisions stipulated in Article 145 of the Law.
The company is managed by one or more of the partners or others, and the partners appoint the manager or managers in the company's memorandum of association or in a separate contract, for a specific or indefinite period of time.
By a decision of the partners, a board of directors may be formed if there are more than one.
The memorandum of association or the partners' decision specifies the method of management of the company, and the majority required for the issuance of decisions when appointing more than one director or forming a board of directors.
The limited liability company represents its manager before the judiciary, arbitration bodies and third parties, and may authorize others to delegate some of his powers to carry out certain work or actions.
Any decision issued to appoint, change or restrict the powers of the director shall not be valid against third parties until it is registered with the Commercial Registry.
The company is committed to the director's actions that fall within the company's purpose.
If the limited liability company has only one director, the partners must appoint a new director within fifteen days from the date of knowledge of this, and the company's auditor, if any, or any of the partners shall have the right to call the General Assembly to convene to appoint a new director of the company.
The partners may remove the director or directors, whether they are appointed in the company's articles of incorporation or in a separate contract, and the partners shall appoint one or more directors to replace those who have been removed, and if the director is a partner in the company, he may not participate in voting on the decision regarding his removal.
One or more partners owning at least one-fourth of the company's capital may apply to the competent judicial authority to request the removal of the director or directors.
A limited liability company shall have a general assembly consisting of all partners.
The General Assembly of the Company shall be convened at the invitation of the Director or Directors in accordance with the conditions specified in the Company's Articles of Association, provided that it shall be convened at least once a year during the six (6) months following the end of the Company's financial year.
The General Assembly of the partners may be called at any time at the request of the directors or the auditor or at the request of one or more partners owning at least ten percent of the capital.
The invitation shall be sent to all partners by registered letters or by modern technology or by any other means stipulated in the Memorandum of Association, at least twenty-one (21) days before the date set for the General Assembly.
Partners representing all shares of the company's capital may convene a general assembly without observing the conditions and periods prescribed for the invitation.
The deliberations of the General Assembly of Partners and its resolutions or the decisions of the Partners by passage shall be recorded in minutes in a special register prepared by the Company for this purpose.
The company may use modern technology to prove and record the deliberations and decisions.
General Assembly meetings of partners may be held and partners may participate in the deliberations and voting on decisions by means of modern technology.
Partners' decisions are made at the General Assembly.
However, partner resolutions may be passed without the need for a general assembly.
 In this case, the company director sends each partner the proposed resolutions and related documents for the partner to vote on in writing.
Unless the Memorandum of Association provides for another means of communication, proposed resolutions and related documents may be sent by any of the following means
Send them to partners with registered letters.
Delivery in person to the partners or their legal representative.
Send it by email or any modern technology.
In all cases, resolutions shall not be valid unless approved by one or more partners representing at least (half) of the capital, unless the company's articles of association stipulate a higher majority.
If the deliberation or the first consultation does not meet the majority stipulated in paragraph (3) of this Article, the partners must be invited to the meeting, in which case the decisions shall be issued with the approval of the majority of the shares represented therein, regardless of the percentage they represent in the capital, unless the company's memorandum of association stipulates otherwise.
The Memorandum of Association may specify any other method of calling a meeting or communicating resolutions.
For each fiscal year, the company's director prepares the company's financial statements and a report on its activity and financial status for the previous fiscal year and his proposals regarding the distribution of profits, if any.
The Director shall make these documents available to the auditor, if any, at least forty-five (45) days prior to the date set for the Annual General Meeting.
The company director shall provide the partners with the company's financial statements, a report on its activities, and the auditor's report, if any, whether by modern technology or by any other means stipulated in the company's articles of association, at least twenty-one (21) days before the date set for the annual general assembly, and he shall also deposit these documents as specified by the regulations.
The agenda of the Partners' General Assembly at its annual meeting must include the following items:
Reviewing the director's report on the company's activity and financial status for the past fiscal year.
Review and discuss the financial statements for the past fiscal year.
Discuss the auditor's report for the past fiscal year, if any, and take a decision on it.
Deciding on the director's proposal regarding the distribution of dividends, if any.
The Partners' General Assembly may not deliberate on matters other than those on the agenda unless facts arise during the meeting that require deliberation.
However, if a partner requests that a particular matter be included on the agenda, the company director must honor the request, otherwise the partner has the right to appeal to the association.
Each partner has the right to discuss the topics on the agenda of the General Assembly of Partners, and the company director is obliged to answer the partners' questions, and if a partner considers that the response to his question is insufficient, he appeals to the Assembly.
Without prejudice to the rights of bona fide third parties, each partner may apply to the competent judicial authority to request the annulment of the decision of the General Assembly of Partners issued in violation of the provisions of the Law or the Company's Articles of Association.
However, the annulment of the decision may only be requested by the partners who objected to it in writing or who were unable to object to it after being informed of it, and the determination of annulment shall result in the decision being considered as if it had never existed for all partners.
The annulment action shall not be heard after the expiration of (ninety) days from the date of issuance of the decision referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article.
In order to file the lawsuit referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article, the plaintiff must be a partner in the company during the filing of the lawsuit and during all its proceedings.
Each partner shall have the right to participate in the deliberations and voting, and shall have a number of votes equal to the number of shares he owns.
Each partner may authorize another partner in writing to attend and vote in the partners' meetings, unless the company's memorandum of association stipulates otherwise.
The Memorandum of Association may stipulate that a partner may appoint a non-partner, in writing, to attend and vote in the partners' meetings.
A non-managing partner may submit a request to the manager, or his authorized representative, to inspect the company's business and examine its records and documents (twice) during the company's financial year, and the company shall fulfill his request within (fifteen) days from the date of his request.
Any condition to the contrary is null and void.
Whoever obtains any information - based on this Article - is obligated to maintain its confidentiality and not to use it for any purpose that may harm the Company or one of its partners, and is obligated to compensate for any damage arising from failure to do so.
The company's memorandum of association may be amended, including increasing or reducing its capital with the approval of one or more partners who own at least three-fourths of the capital, unless the memorandum of association stipulates a higher percentage.
When approving the increase of the company's capital by issuing new shares, the partner shall have the priority in overriding the shares issued against his shares in proportion to his ownership in the company's capital, in accordance with the regulations.
The capital may not be increased by increasing the nominal value of the partners' shares or suspending the right of priority, except by the unanimous consent of the partners.
Except for criminal acts, the company's articles of incorporation may stipulate the settlement of disputes or differences of any nature that may occur between the partners or between the company and its directors by resorting to arbitration or other alternative means of settlement.
The partners determine the amount of the company's capital in its articles of incorporation, and it is divided into shares of equal value, and the share is indivisible and tradable.
If the share is owned by multiple persons, the company may suspend the use of the rights related to it until the owners of the share choose from among them the one who is considered the sole owner of the share vis-à-vis the company.
The company may set a deadline for them to make this choice, failing which it may sell the share for the owner's account.
In this case, the share shall be offered to the other partners and then to third parties, as stipulated in Article 178 of the Law, unless the company's memorandum of association stipulates otherwise.
Unless otherwise stipulated in the company's articles of association, the shares have equal rights to the net profits and liquidation surplus.
The General Assembly determines the percentage to be distributed to the partners from the net profits after deducting the reserves, if any.
The partner is entitled to his share in the profits in accordance with the decision of the General Assembly or the partners issued in this regard, and the decision indicates the date of entitlement and the date of distribution.
The General Assembly may decide to reduce the capital if it exceeds the company's needs or if it suffers losses.
In the latter case, the reduction decision shall be issued only after reading a statement at the general assembly of the partners prepared by the company's director on the reasons for the reduction and the company's obligations and the impact of the reduction on their fulfillment, with a report from the company's auditor attached to this statement.
The aforementioned statement may only be presented to the partners in cases where the partners' decision is passed.
If the reduction of the capital is the result of excess capital over the company's needs, each director of the company must prepare a statement of the company's financial solvency that includes the following:
Examining the company's situation at the date of preparation of the statement, he confirms that there is nothing that would make the company unable to pay its debts and obligations.
The company is able to pay its debts and obligations maturing within (twelve) months following the date of the statement.
Each director of the Company shall sign the statement referred to in paragraph (2) of this Article, include the date of its preparation, and provide it to the Company at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the reduction decision.
The partners shall submit a project to amend the company's memorandum of association, including the reduction of the company's capital, to the Commercial Registry within fifteen days from the date of issuing the reduction decision, and shall attach the documents referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Article, as the case may be, and the reduction decision shall be effective after it is registered and published at the Commercial Registry.
The Memorandum of Association may stipulate that a certain percentage of the net profits shall be set aside to form a reserve to be allocated for the purposes specified in the Memorandum of Association.
When determining the share of shares in the net profits at the Annual General Meeting, the partners may decide to form reserves, to the extent that achieves the interest of the company or ensures the distribution of stable profits, as far as possible, to the partners.
The association may propose from the net profits amounts to fulfill social purposes for the company's employees.
A partner may assign his share to any of the partners in accordance with the conditions stipulated in the company's articles of association.
If a partner wishes to transfer his share to another partner in the company - with or without compensation - he must inform the other partners through the company's manager of the name of the assignee or buyer and the terms of the assignment or sale, and the manager must inform the other partners as soon as the notification reaches him.
Each partner may request the redemption of that share and the payment of its value or its purchase by the Company within (thirty) days from the date of notification of the agreed price.
If more than one partner requests the redemption of this share or shares, it will be divided among them in proportion to their share in the capital.
In case of disagreement over the value of the share, its value shall be assessed at the expense of the redemption applicant or the company, as the case may be, by one or more certified appraisers who shall prepare a report indicating the fair value of the share of the partner wishing to surrender.
If the period specified for exercising the right of redemption expires without any of the partners requesting the redemption of the share, or if the requestor does not pay its value, or if the company does not purchase it within that period, its owner shall have the right to assign it to third parties.
The Memorandum of Association may stipulate other procedures for notifying the transfer of the share or another valuation method or a longer period for exercising the right of redemption and payment of the value or for the purchase by the Company.
The right of redemption stipulated in this Article shall not apply to the transfer of ownership of shares by inheritance, by will, or by virtue of a judgment of the competent judicial authority.
A limited liability company may issue - in accordance with the Capital Market Law - negotiable debt instruments or financing instruments.
Debt instruments or financing instruments must be issued with the approval of the partners and in accordance with the conditions established for amending the company's articles of association.
The company may purchase or mortgage its shares if its articles of association so stipulate, and the shares purchased by the company shall not have a vote in the General Assembly.
The shares may be mortgaged, and the mortgaged creditor may receive the profits, unless otherwise agreed in the mortgage contract.
Regulations shall specify the controls necessary to implement the provisions of this article.
After the approval of one or more partners representing at least ninety percent of the company's capital, the company's articles of incorporation may stipulate the following:
The majority of the partners have the power to bind the minority to accept an offer from a bona fide buyer to purchase all the company's shares at the same price, terms and conditions as the purchase of the majority's shares.
The minority partners may bind the majority to guarantee the sale of the minority's shares in cases where the majority sells their shares at the same price, terms and conditions as the sale of the majority's shares.
If the company's losses reach half of its capital, the company's director must call the General Assembly of the partners to meet within (sixty) days from the date of knowledge of the loss reaching this amount to consider the continuation of the company while taking any of the necessary measures to address or dissolve those losses.
Unless the company's articles of association stipulate a larger majority, the term of the company may be extended for another term by a decision issued by the general assembly of the partners holding half of the shares representing the capital.
If no decision is issued to extend the company's term and it continues to perform its business, its term shall be extended for a similar period under the same conditions set forth in its Memorandum of Association.
A partner who does not wish to continue in the Company may exit the Company, and his shares shall be valued in accordance with the provisions contained in Article (178) of the Law, and the extension shall not be implemented until the share of such partner is sold to the partners or third parties, as the case may be, and its value is paid to him, unless the withdrawing partner agrees otherwise with the other partners.
A third party who has an interest in not extending the deadline may object to it and maintain that it does not apply to him.
The Limited Liability Company shall not be terminated by the death of one of the partners, nor by the imprisonment of one of the partners, nor by the opening of any of the liquidation procedures against him in accordance with the Bankruptcy Law, nor by his insolvency, nor by his withdrawal, unless the company's Memorandum of Association stipulates so.
A public non-profit company: A company that takes the form of a joint-stock company and has no other form, and spends the profits realized from practicing its activity in any of the banks and public non-profit fields that aim exclusively to serve the community at large.
The Ministry, in coordination with the National Center for Nonprofit Sector Development, determines these banks and fields.
A private non-profit company: A company that takes the form of a limited liability company, joint stock company or simplified joint stock company and has no other form, and spends the profits realized from the exercise of its activity in any of the banks and non-profit areas.
A non-profit company is prohibited from going public.
Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, the provisions relating to the form of the company shall apply to the non-profit company, in a manner not inconsistent with its nature.
In order to approve the establishment of a public non-profit company, its articles of association must stipulate the general non-profit banks and fields, and a private non-profit company may stipulate any non-profit banks and fields in its memorandum of association or articles of association.
Subject to the relevant regulations, a non-profit company may receive cash or in-kind returns for its works, products and services, and engage in any legitimate activity that enables it to realize profits to be spent in the banks and areas stipulated in its articles of incorporation or bylaws.
If the decision to amend the articles of association of a public non-profit company includes amending the provisions of disposing of assets or amending the powers of the board of directors or the banks and areas of the company, this amendment shall not be effective until after obtaining the Ministry's approval.
Every partner or shareholder of a non-profit company is a member.
A non-profit company's memorandum of association or articles of association may stipulate the following:
Define the categories, terms and conditions of membership.
Determine the powers of the membership categories and the topics for which the approval of the special assembly of the company's members is required, and the quorum required for this, including the right to control the director or the board of directors, and verify that the company's profits are spent on achieving its objectives in the banks and areas stipulated in its articles of incorporation or bylaws.
Giving a certain class of members the right to vote on the company's decisions in a special assembly.
Granting a certain class of members the right to appoint one or more of the company's directors or board members, in which case they can only be removed by the class that appointed them.
Issuing non-negotiable membership certificates.
Exceptionally, it may be stipulated that a member of a private non-profit company waives his membership.
Requiring annual fees or cash or in-kind contributions for one or more categories of membership in a nonprofit corporation.
The requirement to provide work or service to the company to obtain membership.
The Ministry may regulate aspects related to membership in non-profit companies.
Each category of membership entails equal rights and obligations, and the member is entitled to all rights related to his membership, including the right to participate in the deliberations of the members' assemblies and the right of access to the company's records and documents.
Subject to the provisions of the law and the non-profit company's memorandum of association or articles of association, membership in the non-profit company shall terminate in the following cases
Death or extinction of legal personality.
Assignment to third parties of membership in the private nonprofit corporation.
Revocation in accordance with the provisions of the company's memorandum or articles of association.
Membership expires without renewal.
Termination of the company.
A member may request the termination of his membership, provided that he is responsible for indemnifying the company if the termination results in a breach of his obligations to the company.
Members' data is recorded in a special register prepared by the non-profit company for this purpose.
The Company shall provide the Commercial Registry with the data of the register referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article and any amendment thereto within fifteen (15) days from the date of the Company's registration with the Commercial Registry or from the date of the amendment, as the case may be.
Subject to the provisions of the relevant laws and the company's articles of association, the public non-profit company may accept, manage, invest, and spend gifts, bequests, and endowments in cash and in kind in accordance with the conditions of the donor, testator, or endowment, if any, and if the company wishes to modify or abandon them. If the company wishes to amend or deviate from these conditions, it must obtain the consent of the donor, testator or endowment, and if it is not possible or is unable to do so, it may apply to the competent judicial authority with a request, and the competent judicial authority shall decide on the request in accordance with what it deems to fulfill the condition of the donor, testator or endowment.
A non-profit company must spend the profits realized from the exercise of its activities in the banks and areas stipulated in its memorandum of association or articles of association.
The company may allocate some of its profits to develop its investments and expand its business in accordance with the regulations.
A non-profit company is prohibited from distributing any of its profits to any of the company's members, directors, board members, or employees, unless it is covered by the non-profit company's expenses and areas.
The regulations shall specify the maximum percentage of profits that can be distributed in accordance with this paragraph.
A non-profit company may grant bonuses or any other reasonable benefits to its directors, board members or employees for the services and work they provide to the company.
Any member of the non-profit company may file a lawsuit before the competent judicial authority on behalf of the company to request the recovery of any profits distributed or disbursed in violation of the provisions of this Article.
A personal creditor of any member of a public non-profit company may not seek execution on that member's shares or the rights that accrue thereto.
Subject to the relevant regulations and decisions, non-profit companies may be established by government entities, public bodies and institutions, universities, and other authorized public legal entities.
Public sector employees may establish or participate in public non-profit companies.
As an exception to the relevant regulations, the Zakat, Tax and Customs Authority, in coordination with the Ministry, shall prepare the necessary controls to ensure that non-profit companies are not subject to the provisions for collecting Zakat and/or taxes, and deduct the expenses provided to these companies when determining the tax base of the taxpayer.
A professional company is a company established by one or more persons who are legally licensed to practice one or more liberal professions, or by them with others, for the purpose of practicing those professions.
A professional company shall take any of the forms of companies listed in Article (4) of the Law.
The provisions that are not specifically provided for in this Chapter shall apply to the professional company - the provisions relating to the form of the company it adopts, and what is not inconsistent with its nature.
A partner or shareholder in a professional company, regardless of its form, does not acquire the status of a trader by virtue of his partnership or ownership of shares or stocks in the company.
Persons licensed to practice a single liberal profession may establish among themselves a professional company in any of the forms listed in Article (4) of the Law.
A person licensed to practice a single liberal profession may establish a joint-stock, simplified joint-stock, or one-person limited liability professional company to practice his profession through it.
If he is licensed to practice more than one liberal profession, he may practice all or some of them through the company, after fulfilling the conditions and controls specified by the regulations.
A professional company may be established by those who are licensed to practice more than one liberal profession.
 A professional company may also be established jointly by a person licensed to practice one or more liberal professions and a non-Saudi professional company.
The regulations specify the conditions for establishing these companies and the regulations governing their activities.
A person who is not licensed to practice the profession may participate or contribute to a professional company - except for a solidarity company and a simple partnership company as a solidarity partner - if his participation does not affect the independence of the profession, or a person with a legal capacity.
The regulations outline additional controls that partners must observe to manage this type of company in a way that does not affect the independence of the profession or the practice of professionals.
A partner in a professional company and a shareholder practicing a liberal profession may not participate or contribute to another professional company practicing the same liberal profession, unless the company's memorandum of association or articles of association so stipulate, without prejudice to the relevant regulations.
The regulations specify the provisions and controls under which a licensed partner or shareholder may participate or contribute to another professional company.
A professional company shall be incorporated in accordance with the prescribed incorporation procedures for company formation.
Neither the partners nor the shareholders of a professional company may dissolve it without announcing this and informing all those dealing with it in writing in accordance with the procedures prescribed by the regulations.
A professional company does not practice the profession or free professions that are the subject of its activity except through licensed partners or shareholders.
However, it may use in its work other persons who are not licensed to practice the profession or professions on its activity, provided that they are subject to the company's supervision and responsibility.
A professional company practices only the profession or liberal professions that are the subject of its activity.
A professional company may not engage in business.
However, it may own real estate assets and invest its funds in real estate, securities, or any other type of investment to serve its purposes.
The regulations specify the rules for this.
In practicing the profession or liberal professions that are the subject of its activity, the professional company shall be subject to the supervision of the entity or entities legally concerned with supervising the practice of these professions.
The professional company must comply with the provisions of the laws and regulations set by the concerned authority or authorities according to their jurisdiction.
The concerned authority may review the records and documents of the professional company and inspect it - within the limits of its jurisdiction - to verify its compliance with the provisions of the regulations related to the free profession of its activity, and the professional company shall be obligated to provide what is requested of it.
Neither a partner nor a shareholder in a professional company may practice his free profession except through it, unless it is owned by one person.
With the exception of paragraph (1) of this Article, a partner or shareholder may practice his/her liberal profession through other than the company if the other partners agree to this in writing or obtain the approval of the General Assembly, as the case may be.
If the partner or shareholder violates the provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Article, the fees and other financial benefits he receives shall be the right of the Company.
Without prejudice to paragraph (2) of this Article, the professional company shall be managed by one - or more - of its partners or others, and if it is managed by one person, he must be one of the licensed partners, and if it is managed by more than one person, the number of licensed partners may not be less than the number specified by the regulations.
The company's memorandum of association or articles of association shall specify the terms of appointment of the director, his powers, his remuneration, the duration of his management of the company, and the manner of his removal.
A professional joint stock company is managed by a board of directors composed of its shareholders or others, and the regulations specify the number of board members who must be authorized shareholders.
The company's articles of association specify the powers of the board and the provisions related to its composition.
The authority of the director or board of directors of a professional company - owned by more than one person - may not include anything that jeopardizes the independence of the partners or shareholders in the exercise of their independent professions.
Each partner or shareholder of a professional firm shall be personally liable for his professional errors towards the firm and the other partners or shareholders, as the case may be.
