Subject to the provision of paragraph (1) of Article (Two Hundred and Twentieth) of the Law, a private non-profit non-public company may convert to any form of company unless the company's memorandum of association or articles of association stipulate otherwise, provided that any profits, reserves, donations, etc. in excess of the capital upon incorporation shall be spent in the non-profit banks and fields stipulated in its memorandum of association or articles of association, and any exemptions obtained by it shall be refunded.
The regulations specify the provisions for this.
Any company may be transformed into a public or private non-profit company with the unanimous consent of the partners or shareholders.
Without prejudice to the provisions for the assignment of shares or shares prescribed according to the form of the company, partners or shareholders who object to the transformation decision may exit the company based on a written request submitted to it within (fifteen) days from the date of issuance of the decision.
In this case, the fulfillment of the value of their shares or shares shall be according to the agreed value or according to a report prepared by one or more certified valuers indicating the fair value of their shares or shares on the date of transfer, unless the company's memorandum of association or articles of association stipulate otherwise.
In case of dispute, the objector may resort to the competent judicial authority.
The conversion of the company does not result in the creation of a new legal entity, and the company retains its rights and remains liable for its obligations prior to the conversion.
The transformation of a solidarity company or a simple recommendation company into any form of company shall not discharge the solidarity partners from their responsibility for the debts of the company prior to the transformation, unless the creditors expressly accept this or if none of them object to the decision of the partners to transform within (30) days from the date they are informed of it by registered letter or by modern technical means.
A merger is the joining of one or more companies with another existing company, or by combining two or more companies to form a new company.
The merger proposal must be prepared for approval by each company party to it in accordance with the conditions prescribed for amending its memorandum of association or articles of association, and the merger proposal shall specify its terms, and indicate the nature and value of the consideration, including the number of shares or shares belonging to the merged company in the capital of the merging company or the company arising from the merger, and a statement of the ability of each company party to the merger to fulfill its debts.
Subject to the provisions of the relevant laws, the company, even if it is in liquidation in accordance with the provisions of the Law, may merge into another company of one form or another.
A merger is valid only after the assets of each company involved have been evaluated.
The consideration in a merger shall be shares or stocks in the merged company or the company resulting from the merger.
The competent authority may determine the controls and procedures for implementing the provisions of this Article, including the monetary consideration for the purchase of fractional shares or shares, or to compensate the partner or shareholder who objects to the merger decision, as well as the controls of the partner or shareholder's vote in the event that he has an interest other than his interest as a partner or shareholder in the company.
The regulations shall specify the regulations governing the merger of one or more companies into a wholly owned company, or the merger of two or more companies wholly owned by the same partners or shareholders, and may exempt these cases from some of the provisions contained in this section.
Each partner party to the merger must announce it at least thirty (30) days before the date set for the decision on the merger proposal and the vote on it.
Any of the creditors of the merged company may object to the merger by registered letter to the company or by any other means specified in the declaration referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article, within fifteen days from the date of the declaration, and the company shall fulfill the debt of the objecting creditor if it is current or provide sufficient security to fulfill it if it is postponed.
A creditor who has notified the Company of its objection to the merger in accordance with paragraph (2) of this Article and the Company has not fulfilled the debt if it is current or provided sufficient security to fulfill it if it is postponed, may apply to the competent judicial authority within a period not less than ten (10) days prior to the date set for the decision on the merger, and the competent judicial authority in this case shall order the fulfillment of the debt if it is current or provide sufficient security for its fulfillment if it is postponed. If it considers that the merger will result in serious damage to the objecting creditor without the ability of the merged company or the merging company to fulfill the debt or provide security, it may order the suspension or postponement of the merger, provided that its decision is issued before the merger decision takes effect.
If the competent judicial authority does not decide on the creditor's objection before the entry into force of the merger decision and subsequently proves the validity of the objecting creditor's claim, it may issue a decision to compensate him for the damages he suffers as a result of this merger.
The merger decision shall be effective from the date the data of the merged company is entered in the register of the merging company in the Commercial Registry, otherwise the merger decision shall be effective from the date the resulting company is entered in the Commercial Registry.
All rights, obligations, assets and contracts of the merged company or companies shall be transferred to the merged company or the company arising from the merger upon the entry into force of the merger decision.
Without prejudice to the provisions of the Capital Market Law, when a person, or more than one person acting in concert, increases their ownership to such an extent that - individually or jointly with persons acting in concert - ninety percent (90%) or more of the shares of the shareholding company that has voting rights either directly or indirectly, or when contracting to purchase this percentage unconditionally, this must be disclosed to the shareholders of the company.
Within (ninety) days from the date of disclosure, any shareholder of the Company may submit a request to the percentage owner or the purchaser to make an offer to purchase his/her shares.
 The percentage owner or purchaser must make an offer to the applicant to purchase their shares.
Without prejudice to the provisions of the Capital Market Law, a shareholder whose ownership has reached (ninety percent) of the shares of the shareholding company with voting rights, whether directly or indirectly, and who has unconditionally contracted to purchase this percentage, may apply to the competent authority within a period not exceeding (sixty) days from the date of reaching that amount or from the date of unconditionally contracting to purchase this percentage to obtain approval to make a compulsory offer to force the other shareholders to sell their shares to him.
Any shareholder of the joint stock company may, within (sixty) days from the date of submitting an offer to purchase his shares in the company in accordance with paragraph (1) of this Article or from the date of submitting the mandatory offer to purchase his shares in the company in accordance with paragraph (2) of this Article, resort to the competent judicial authority to object to the purchase price, and may not - in the case of the mandatory offer in accordance with paragraph (2) of this Article - suspend the effectiveness of the mandatory offer except by a decision of the competent authority. The settlement of the mandatory offer shall be within a period of seven (7) days from the expiration of the period granted to the shareholders to object unless the competent judicial authority orders otherwise.
The regulations shall specify the controls necessary to implement the provisions of this Article, including controls related to disclosure, purchase price, and duration related to the cases mentioned in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Article.
A company may be divided into two or more companies, even if it is in liquidation.
The company or companies resulting from the division may take any of the forms of companies listed in Article (4) of the Law.
The decision to divide the company shall be issued in accordance with the conditions prescribed for amending its memorandum of association or articles of association.
The division decision must include a statement of the number of partners or shareholders, the share of each of them in the company or companies arising from the division and the company being divided, the rights and obligations of these companies, and how the assets, rights, and obligations are distributed among them.
The company arising from the division shall be the successor to the divided company to the extent of what has been transferred to it in accordance with the division decision.
However, the creditors of the divided company may demand the two companies or companies arising from the division to pay the debts and obligations incurred by the divided company, and the two companies or companies shall be jointly liable for the performance of such debts and obligations; except in cases where it is agreed with the creditors that their rights to claim are transferred to the company arising from the division to which the debts and obligations have been assigned.
The regulations specify the controls related to the division of the company, including the procedures, conditions and conditions that must be met for the division, depending on the form of the company.
Without prejudice to the special agreements concluded between the Kingdom and certain countries or foreign companies, and the regulations in force in the Kingdom, and with the exception of the provisions relating to the establishment of companies, the provisions of the Law shall apply to foreign companies that carry out their activities and business inside the Kingdom.
The foreign company conducts its activity and business inside the Kingdom through a branch, representative office or any other form, in accordance with the Foreign Investment Law and other relevant statutory provisions.
Every branch or representative office of a foreign company must put on all its papers, documents and publications its address in the Kingdom, in addition to the company's full name, address and headquarters.
The application to register a branch of a foreign company must include the start and end date of the branch's fiscal year.
With the exception of representative offices, a branch of a foreign company must prepare financial statements related to its activity within the Kingdom in accordance with the accounting standards adopted in the Kingdom, and deposit these documents and the auditor's report thereon within (six) months after the end of the fiscal year related to the activity of that branch as specified in the regulations.
The appointment of the auditor may be made by a decision of the foreign company's branch manager based on the authorization of the foreign company.
A foreign company's branch or representative office within the Kingdom is considered to be its domicile with respect to its activity and business within the Kingdom, and all regulations applicable in the Kingdom apply to it.
If the foreign company engages in its activity and business before completing the licensing procedures, if any, and registering it with the Commercial Registry, or performs acts that exceed what is authorized, the company and the persons who engaged in that activity and performed those acts shall be jointly and severally liable for them.
If the foreign company's presence in the Kingdom is for the purpose of carrying out certain works within a specified period of time, it shall be registered with the Commercial Registry on a temporary basis and its registration shall terminate upon the completion and execution of those works, and the registration shall be canceled after the liquidation of its rights and obligations, in accordance with the provisions of the Law and other applicable laws.
However, they may be continued after meeting the necessary statutory requirements.
The Ministry, in coordination with the Ministry of Investment, may establish the necessary controls to implement the provisions of this article.
Before the partners, general assembly or shareholders decide to dissolve the company, the company's directors or board members shall prepare a statement stating that they have examined the company's conditions, including confirmation that the company's assets are sufficient to pay its debts by the end of the proposed liquidation period and that the company is not in default according to the Bankruptcy Law.
This statement shall be presented within (thirty) days from the date of its preparation to the partners, general assembly or shareholders to take a decision to dissolve the company.
If the statement referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article shows that the company's assets are insufficient to pay its debts or that the company is in default according to the Bankruptcy Law, the partners, general assembly or shareholders may not decide to dissolve the company, otherwise they shall be jointly liable for any remaining debt owed by the company.
Subject to the causes of termination specific to each form of company, the company shall be terminated for one of the following reasons
The expiration of the specified period - if it is for a fixed term - unless it is extended in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
The partners or shareholders agree to dissolve it.
A final court ruling on its dissolution or invalidity.
If the company goes into liquidation in accordance with the provisions of the law, the partners, general assembly or shareholders must take liquidation procedures, and the company retains legal personality to the extent necessary for liquidation.
If the company lapses for any of the reasons stipulated in the Law, the partners, shareholders, directors or board of directors of the company, as the case may be, must prepare the statement referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 422 of the Law, unless it was prepared before its lapse and the period from the date of its preparation did not exceed thirty (30) days.
If the company lapses and its assets are insufficient to pay its debts or is in default according to the Bankruptcy Law, it must apply to the competent judicial authority to open any of the liquidation procedures according to the Bankruptcy Law.
If the company is liquidated in violation of the provision of this Article, the partners, shareholders, directors or board members, as the case may be, shall be jointly liable for any remaining debt owed by the company.
A public non-profit company may be liquidated only after obtaining the Ministry's approval.
Unless the company's memorandum of association or articles of association, or the partners, general assembly or shareholders, as the case may be, agree on how to liquidate the company upon its termination, the liquidation shall be in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Law.
The authority of the company's director or board of directors ends with the expiration of the company, however, they continue to manage the company, and to third parties they are considered to be the liquidator until the liquidator is appointed.
The company's associations remain in existence during the liquidation period, and their role is limited to exercising their competencies that do not conflict with the liquidator's competencies.
During the liquidation period, the partner or shareholder still has the right of access to the company's documents as stipulated in the law, the company's memorandum of association, or its articles of association.
One or more liquidators, partners, shareholders, or others, will perform the liquidation.
The liquidation period under the Law shall not exceed (three) years, and may not be extended except by order of the competent judicial authority.
The liquidator shall be appointed by a decision of the partners, general assembly or shareholders in accordance with the conditions prescribed for amending the company's memorandum of association or articles of association, depending on the form of the company, within a period not exceeding sixty (60) days from the date of the company's termination.
If the liquidator cannot be appointed within that period, he shall be appointed by a decision of the competent judicial authority based on a request submitted by any of the partners, shareholders, or a stakeholder.
Except for the provision of paragraph (1) of this Article, if the company's termination is the result of its dissolution or invalidation by a final judicial ruling, the liquidator shall be appointed by a decision of the judicial authority from which that ruling was issued.
Before issuing the decision to appoint the liquidator in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Article, the competent judicial authority shall request the partners, shareholders, directors or board of directors of the company, as the case may be, to submit the statement referred to in paragraph (1) of Article (142) of the Law Submit the statement referred to in paragraph (1) of Article (two hundred and forty-two) of the Law or the necessary data, accounting records, or financial statements, if any, proving that the company's assets are sufficient to pay its debts by the end of the liquidation period as provided for in this section and that the company is not in default in accordance with the Bankruptcy Law, within a period not exceeding (thirty) days from the date of the request. If the competent judicial authority finds that the company's assets are not sufficient to pay its debts, it shall take the necessary measures to open any of the liquidation procedures in accordance with the Bankruptcy Law.
In all cases, the resolution appointing the liquidator must specify his powers and fees, the restrictions imposed on him if any, and the period required for liquidation.
The liquidator shall register and publicize his appointment at the Commercial Registry, and his appointment or the liquidation proceedings shall not be invoked against third parties except from the date of registration and publicity.
The liquidator shall be removed in the manner in which he was appointed.
In all cases, the competent judicial authority may, upon the request of any of the partners, shareholders or creditors of the company for acceptable reasons, order his removal.
The decision or judgment dismissing the liquidator must include the appointment of his replacement and specify his powers and fees.
If there are multiple liquidators, they must act jointly, and their actions shall be valid only by their unanimity, unless the decision appointing them stipulates otherwise or the body that appointed them authorizes them to do so.
Subject to the restrictions contained in the liquidator's appointment decision, the liquidator shall represent the Company before the judiciary, arbitration bodies and third parties, and shall perform all acts required by the liquidation, in particular the monetization of the Company's assets, including the sale of movable property or real estate by auction or any other method that ensures obtaining the best possible price.
The liquidator may sell the company's assets in bulk, or offer them as a share in another company, if authorized by the body that appointed him.
The liquidator may not start new business unless it is necessary to complete previous business.
The company is bound by the liquidator's actions within the limits of his powers.
The liquidator's powers shall terminate at the end of the liquidation, or at the end of the liquidation period (whichever is earlier), unless extended in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
The director or members of the board of directors of the company shall provide the liquidator upon his appointment with the company's records, documents, explanations and data requested by him.
Within ninety (90) days of commencing his work, the liquidator shall prepare an inventory of all the company's assets, rights and liabilities, and request the company's auditor, if any, to issue a report on that inventory.
The entity that appointed the liquidator may extend this period if necessary.
At the end of each financial year, the liquidator shall prepare financial statements and a report on the liquidation work, including a statement of his observations and reservations on the liquidation work and the reasons that hindered or delayed it, if any, and his suggestions for extending the liquidation period.
He must provide the Commercial Registry with a copy of these documents and submit them to the partners, general assembly or shareholders for approval in accordance with the provisions of the company's memorandum of association or articles of association.
If at any time during the liquidation, the liquidator realizes that the company's assets are not sufficient to pay its debts, he must immediately inform the partners or shareholders and the company's creditors, and apply to the competent judicial authority to open any of the liquidation procedures in accordance with the Bankruptcy Law.
The liquidator shall pay the company's debts if they are current in order of priority, and set aside the amounts necessary to pay them if they are postponed or disputed.
Debts arising from liquidation have priority over other debts.
After paying the debts, the liquidator shall return to the partners or shareholders the value of their shares or shares in the capital, and distribute the surplus thereafter in accordance with the provisions of the company's memorandum of association or articles of association.
If the Memorandum of Association or Articles of Association do not contain provisions in this regard, the surplus shall be distributed to the partners or shareholders in proportion to their shares or shares in the capital.
If the company's net assets are insufficient to fulfill the value of the partners' shares or shareholders' shares, the loss shall be distributed among them according to the ratio established in the distribution of losses.
Upon liquidation, the net assets of the non-profit company shall be transferred to the persons or non-profit entities specified in the non-profit company's articles of incorporation or bylaws.
If the net assets of a nonprofit corporation arise from a gift, bequest, or endowment, they will go to the nonprofit persons or entities designated by the donor, testator, or endowment.
If the company's memorandum of association or articles of association do not specify the persons or non-profit entities to which its funds shall be transferred, and if the donor, testator or endowment does not specify them, the funds shall be transferred - after obtaining the Ministry's approval - to persons or non-profit entities that aim to achieve banks and fields similar to the banks and fields specified for those funds.
The persons or non-profit entities to which the funds have been transferred are obliged to use them in the banks and areas specified for them.
Upon completion of the liquidation work, the liquidator will submit a detailed financial report on his work.
The liquidation ends with the approval of this report by the entity that appointed the liquidator.
The liquidator must register and publicize the end of the liquidation with the Commercial Registry.
The termination of liquidation against third parties shall only be considered as of the date of removal of the company's registration from the Commercial Register.
The liquidator shall be liable to compensate for damage caused to the company, partners, shareholders or third parties as a result of exceeding the limits of his powers or as a result of errors committed by him in the performance of his duties.
Liability shall be either personal for a single liquidator or joint for all liquidators if there are multiple liquidators and the decision is unanimous, unless each of them has the right to act separately in accordance with the provisions of Article (Two Hundred and Fifty-One) of the Law.
Except in the cases of forgery and fraud, a suit against the liquidator shall not be heard after (five) years from the date of deletion of the company's registration with the Commercial Registry.
Without prejudice to any penalty stipulated by another law, a term of imprisonment not exceeding (three) years and a fine not exceeding (5,000,000) five million riyals, or one of these two penalties, shall be punished:
Any director, officer, board member, auditor or liquidator who intentionally recorded false or misleading data or information in the company's financial statements or in subsequent reports or in statements regarding the reduction of the company's capital or the sufficiency of its assets to pay its debts upon liquidation, and other reports and statements presented to the partners, general assembly or shareholders in accordance with the provisions of the Law, or intentionally omitted to mention a material fact in any of the above with the intention of showing the company's financial position in a manner contrary to the truth.
Any director, officer, or board member who uses the company's funds, powers, or votes held in that capacity in a manner that he knows is against the interests of the company; to achieve personal purposes, to favor a company or person, or to benefit from a project or transaction in which he has a direct or indirect interest.
Any liquidator who uses the company's funds, assets or rights with third parties in a manner that he knows is against the interests of the company or intentionally causes harm to partners, shareholders or creditors, to achieve personal purposes, to favor a company or person, to benefit from a project or transaction in which he has a direct or indirect interest, or to favor one creditor over another in the fulfillment of his right without a legitimate reason.
Without prejudice to any penalty stipulated by another law, any person who commits an offense shall be punished with a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year, a fine not exceeding 1,000,000 Riyals, or one of these two penalties:
Any auditor who fails to report to the Company, through the organs or persons responsible for its management, irregularities discovered during his/her work that appear to be criminal offenses.
Anyone who receives, guarantees, or promises benefits in exchange for voting in a certain direction or not participating in voting in order to harm the company's interests, as well as anyone who grants, guarantees, or promises such benefits.
Whoever announces, publishes or declares by any means, with the intention of creating the illusion that a company that has not completed its registration procedures with the Commercial Registry has been registered.
Any public employee who discloses to the competent authorities company secrets that he learned about by virtue of his job.
Anyone who, in order to fulfill the quotas and attract subscriptions, falsely published the names of persons who are, or will be, associated with the company in any way.
Any person who decides to distribute, distribute or receive profits or returns in bad faith; in violation of the provisions of the law, the company's memorandum of association or articles of association, and any auditor who is aware of this violation and fails to report it in his report.
Anyone who exaggerates or provides false declarations or statements from partners, shareholders, or others, regarding the valuation of in-kind shares, the distribution of shares among partners or shares among shareholders, or the fulfillment of their full value, knowing this, whether when the company is established, when the capital is increased, or when the distribution of shares among partners or shares among shareholders is modified.
Any director, officer, board member or auditor who fails to call the general assembly of the partners or shareholders - or fails to take the necessary measures, as the case may be - upon learning that the losses have reached the estimated limits in accordance with the provisions of Articles (133) and (182) of the Law.
Any director, officer, board member, auditor, or liquidator who exploits or discloses a company secret with the intention of harming the company.
Anyone who intentionally obstructs the work of those who have the right, under the law, to access the company's papers, documents, accounts, records and documents, or causes this, or refuses to enable them to perform their work.
Any person appointed to inspect a company willfully misrepresents facts in their reports or willfully omits to state material facts that would affect the outcome of the inspection.
Without prejudice to any penalty stipulated in another law, he shall be punished with a fine not exceeding (500,000) five hundred thousand riyals:
Anyone who causes the disruption of the convening or convening of the general assembly of partners or shareholders, and anyone who prevents a partner or shareholder from participating in a shareholders' or partners' assembly, or prevents him from enjoying the voting rights associated with his shares or shares in the company in violation of the provisions of the law.
Anyone who fails to fulfill his duty to convene the general assembly of partners or shareholders within the period prescribed for its convening in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
Any person who accepted his appointment as a member of the board of directors of a joint stock company or remained a member thereof in violation of the provisions of the Law, and any board member of a company in which such violations occurred and he was aware of them and did not object to them in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
Every member of the board of directors of a joint stock company who obtained a guarantee or loan from the company in violation of the provisions of the Law, and every member of the board of directors of a company in which this violation occurred and was aware of it and did not object to it in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
Anyone who breaches his duty to maintain the company's accounting records and supporting documents to clarify its business and contracts, or to prepare financial statements in accordance with the accounting standards adopted in the Kingdom or deposit them in accordance with the provisions of the law.
Anyone who neglects to fulfill his duty to provide the competent authority with the documents stipulated in the law.
Whoever neglects to fulfill his duty to make the necessary documents available to the partner or shareholder in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
Anyone who neglects to fulfill his duty to prepare and record the minutes of meetings in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
Anyone who neglects to perform his duty to include any of the data listed in Article (12) of the Law.
Any person who accepts or continues to perform the work of the company's auditor knowing that there are reasons that prevent him from performing such work in accordance with the provisions of this Law.
Whoever neglects to perform his duty to register the company with the Commercial Registry in accordance with the provisions of the Law, and whoever fails to register the amendment of the company's memorandum of association or articles of association with the Commercial Registry in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
Whoever intentionally proves in the company's memorandum of association, articles of association, or other company documents, its application for incorporation, or the documents and documents accompanying this application, statements that are untrue or contrary to the provisions of the Law, and whoever knowingly signs these documents or registers them with the Commercial Registry.
Any director or board member of a professional company who violates the regulations governing the activity of professional companies or the general conditions, controls and rules referred to in Article (80) of the Law.
Any person who violates the provisions of Article (2) of the Law, and any director or board member of a professional company who violates the provisions of Article (2.4) of the Law.
Every director, board member, or sole proprietor of a professional company if it is practicing a liberal profession and none of its partners or shareholders are licensed to practice it.
Any liquidator who fails to fulfill his duty to register his appointment decision or to register and notify the end of liquidation with the Commercial Registry in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
Anyone who neglects to take the necessary corrective measures to address the violation committed after being informed of it in accordance with the provisions of the law.
Any auditor who fails to fulfill his duties as stipulated in the law.
Any company or its official who fails to apply the provisions of the law and regulations or fails to comply with the controls or decisions issued by the competent authority, without giving a reasonable reason for this.
In determining the penalty, the gravity of the crime or offense, its circumstances, circumstances, and effects are taken into account.
In case of recidivism, the penalties prescribed for the offenses stipulated in Articles Two Hundred and Sixty-Six and Two Hundred and Sixty-One of the Law shall be doubled.
Anyone who commits the same crime for which a final judgment or decision of conviction has been issued within three years from the date of issuance of that judgment or decision.
The competent judicial authority may take, in addition to or instead of the penalties prescribed in Articles Two Hundred and Sixty-Six and Two Hundred and Sixty-One of the Law, any of the following:
Warn the person concerned.
Oblige the person concerned to take the necessary steps to avoid the offense, or to take the necessary corrective steps to remedy its effects.
Requiring the person concerned to stop or refrain from carrying out the act that is the subject of the lawsuit.
Prohibited from being a member of the board of directors of a listed company.
The competent authority has the right to take, in addition to or instead of the penalties prescribed in Article (262) of the Law, any of those mentioned in paragraphs (1/a) and (1/b) of this Article with regard to violations.
The Public Prosecution is competent to investigate and prosecute the crimes stipulated in Articles Two Hundred and Sixty-Six and Two Hundred and Sixty-One of the Law.
The competent court shall hear and adjudicate all civil and criminal cases and disputes arising from the application of the provisions of the law and regulations, and shall impose the prescribed penalties for violating their provisions, except with regard to shareholding companies listed on the capital market.
The Securities Disputes Resolution Committee is responsible for hearing and adjudicating appeals from the Authority's decisions and all civil and criminal lawsuits and disputes arising from the application of the provisions of the Law and Regulations, and for imposing the prescribed penalties for violating its provisions, with regard to the shareholding companies listed on the financial market.
The Committee shall apply the rules and procedures it is required to follow in accordance with the Capital Market Law in relation to the cases assigned to it in accordance with the provisions of the Law.
A committee shall be formed by a decision of the Minister, consisting of not less than three members, headed by a person with a legal qualification, and shall be competent to consider the violations stipulated in Article 62 of the Law and impose penalties for them, except for violations related to shareholding companies listed on the capital market.
The Minister may specify the offenses for which direct penalties may be imposed without submitting them to the committee.
The person against whom the penalty decision is issued has the right to appeal to the competent court within thirty days from the date of notification in accordance with the means of notification prescribed by the regulations.
The rules of the committee's work, and the remuneration of its chairman, members and secretariat, shall be issued by a decision of the minister.
The Board of the Authority is competent to impose the prescribed penalties for the violations stipulated in Article (Two Hundred and Sixty-two) of the Law related to the shareholding companies listed in the financial market, and the person against whom a decision is issued by the Board of the Authority has the right to appeal to the Securities Dispute Resolution Committee in accordance with the provisions of the Financial Market Law.
Under a decision of the competent authority, the officials assigned to control the acts stipulated in Articles (Two hundred and sixty-six, two hundred and sixty-one and two hundred and sixty-two) of the Law shall have the status of criminal seizure in proving the crimes and violations stipulated in the Law, and for this purpose they may seize whatever documents and documents they deem relevant to the crime or the violation, as well as documents related to the crime or violation.
The Minister and the Board of the Authority, as the case may be, may issue rules and regulations governing the work and tasks of the employees referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article and establish rules for granting financial rewards to employees for detecting crimes and violations stipulated in the Law.
The application of the penalties contained in this section shall not prejudice the right of any person to claim compensation from anyone who caused him damage as a result of committing any of the crimes and violations stipulated in the Law.
The competent authority has the right to supervise companies with regard to the application of the provisions stipulated in the Law and the company's memorandum of association or articles of association, including the power to inspect the company, examine its accounts and request whatever data, records, documents and records it deems necessary from the company's directors, board of directors or executive management through one or more of its employees or experts selected for this purpose, and may also, at its discretion, send one or more representatives as an observer to attend the general assemblies of companies to ensure the application of the provisions of the Law.
All officials of the company shall inform the representatives of the Ministry, and the representatives of the Authority if it is a joint stock company listed on the financial market or seeking to do so, each according to his competence, in relation to the works stipulated in Article (Two Hundred and Seventy) of the Law; all the records and documents of the company and provide them with all information and clarifications related to the same.
If the application for the establishment of a company founded or co-founded by the State or other authorized public legal entities requires an exception from some of the provisions of the Law, the application for approval of the establishment and the exception, including the reasons thereof, shall be submitted to the Council of Ministers for consideration of approval.
The provisions of the Law shall apply to shares or shares owned by an endowment.
The Authority shall be the competent authority to supervise and monitor the shareholding companies listed on the financial market, and issue rules regulating their work, including organizing mergers if one of the parties is a shareholding company listed on the financial market.
The competent authority shall establish a regulation for the governance of joint stock companies that includes rules for the leadership and guidance of the company: How to organize the various relationships between the board of directors, executive management, shareholders and stakeholders, activate the role of shareholders in the company and facilitate the exercise of their rights, activate the role of the board of directors and its committees and the company's committees and develop their efficiency, determine the controls for the formation of boards of directors and candidacy for membership, including setting special rules and procedures to facilitate the decision-making process and add transparency and credibility to it in order to protect the rights of shareholders and stakeholders and achieve competitiveness and transparency in the market and business environment, and special rules and procedures for the governance of general assemblies and indicate their competencies.
The Ministry may establish corporate governance regulations for other companies, including the provisions of this paragraph in a manner not inconsistent with their nature.
The Ministry may establish the necessary rules and procedures to ensure that it obtains the information of the real beneficiary of the companies subject to the provisions of the Law, except for the shareholding companies listed on the Stock Exchange.
The Minister and the Board of the Authority shall issue the necessary regulations and decisions to implement the provisions of the Law.
The competent authority may utilize public or private entities to perform the tasks assigned to it in the Law, and may assign some of them to these entities.
The competent authority may organize the reporting of violations of the provisions of the law and regulations, including determining the financial rewards for whistleblowers, the rules for their payment and eligibility, and the procedures that contribute to their protection.
The Minister and the Board of the Authority shall issue regulations, each within a maximum period of (one hundred and eighty) days from the date of publication of the Law, and the regulations shall specify the rules, periods and procedures, specify the documents or data necessary to implement the provisions of the Law, specify the controls of using modern technology in informing and inviting to attend the meetings of partners, shareholders or public and private shareholders' assemblies, specify the controls of the participation of the partner or shareholder in deliberations and voting on decisions, and the controls of the eligibility to attend and vote in meetings of partners, shareholders or shareholders' assemblies.
Any of the procedures stipulated in the law or regulations may be electronic, including submitting applications for establishing companies or amending their articles of incorporation or bylaws, registration and registration procedures with the Commercial Registry, signing applications, documents and records of companies, filing financial statements, and other procedures.
The competent authority may propose the necessary regulations to incentivize companies to undertake social responsibility and the stages of its application, which shall be issued by a decision of the Council of Ministers.
The regulations determine the financial compensation for the services provided by the competent authority to implement the provisions of the law.
The Law replaces the Companies Law issued by Royal Decree No. (M/3) dated 28/1/1437H and the Professional Companies Law issued by Royal Decree No. (M/17) dated 26/1/1441H, and repeals all conflicting provisions.
The system shall enter into force one hundred and eighty days after the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
