He then proceeded to the second work, which is the imitation of celestial bodies, emulating them, accepting their qualities, and following their descriptions.
The first are descriptions of it in addition to what is underneath it from the realm of the universe and corruption, namely, what it gives it from heating by itself or cooling by accident, illumination, tempering, condensation, and all the other things it does to prepare it for the overflow of spiritual images from the omnipresent Actor.
The second are descriptions of them in themselves, such as being transparent, light, pure, free from impurities and abominations, and moving by rotation, some on their own center and some on the center of others.
The third kind are descriptions of them in addition to the existent one, such as the fact that they are always seen, never turned away from Him, long for Him, act according to His judgment, are harnessed to fulfill His will, and do not move except by His will and in His grasp.
So he did his best to imitate her in each of these three ways.
As for the first, he committed himself not to see any need, infirmity, harm, or hindrance from animals or plants that he was able to remove, except to remove it.
Whenever his sight falls on a plant that is obscured from the sun by a barrier or attached to another plant that harms it or thirst that is about to spoil it, he removes that barrier if it is removable, separates it from the harmful plant, and takes care of it with watering as much as possible.
Whenever he sees an animal that is weighed down by a snake, a thorn or thistle, or something harmful falling into its eyes or ears, or thirst or hunger, he shall take care to remove all these things from it with his effort, and feed and water it.
Whenever his sight falls on water that is flowing to water a plant or an animal, and he is hindered from its passage by an obstacle such as a stone that has fallen into it or a cliff that has collapsed on him, he removes all of this from him.
He continued to indulge in this type of mimicry until he reached his limit.
As for the second, he obliged himself to maintain purity, remove the filth and abomination from his body, wash with water most of the time, clean his nails, teeth, and other parts of his body, and perfume them with what is possible from the goodness of plants and fragrant fats, and clean and perfume his clothes until they shine with beauty, cleanliness, and goodness until they sparkle with goodness, beauty, cleanliness, and goodness.
Sometimes he circled the island, circled its coastline, and traveled around it; sometimes he circled his house or some kada for a few turns. Either walking or jogging, and sometimes spinning on himself until he fainted.
As for the third, his likeness to her was that he would keep thinking about the Existent One, then cut off the ties of the senses, close his eyes, plug his ears, and stop following the imagination, and strive with all his might to think of nothing but Him and not to associate with Him.
When he became more and more round, he lost sight of all senses, imagination and all the powers of the bodily instruments weakened, and the action of his own self - which is innocent of the body - strengthened, so that at times his thought was free from taint and he could see the existent being.
If he has a weakness that interrupts his purpose of eating some food on the mentioned conditions, then he will move on to his business of imitating celestial bodies in the three mentioned ways.
He has been doing this for a while as he struggles, struggles, struggles and struggles with his physical strength.
In the times when he is able to show up and his thoughts are free from taint, he sees something of the conditions of the third type of people.
Then he sought the third likeness and endeavored to attain it by looking at the attributes of the Existent One.
During his scientific consideration before starting work, he realized that they are of two kinds Either a positive attribute, such as knowledge, ability, and wisdom, or a negative attribute, such as the absence of physicality, its appendages, and what is related to it, even at a distance.
The attributes of existence require this disguise so that they do not have any of the attributes of bodies, which include multiplicity, so that His Self is not multiplied by these attributes of existence, but all of them return to a single meaning, which is the truth of His Self.
So he asked how to resemble him in each of these two ways.
As for the positive attributes, when he knew that they all refer to the reality of his Self and that there is no multiplicity in them in any way, since multiplicity is an attribute of bodies, and he knew that his knowledge of his Self is not a meaning additional to his Self, but that his Self is his knowledge of his Self, and his knowledge of his Self is his Self, he realized that if he can know his Self, that knowledge by which he knows his Self is not a meaning additional to his Self, but is his Self.
He saw that imitating Him in the attributes of the affirmative is to know Him only without associating any of the attributes of bodies, so he took himself to it.
As for the negative attributes, they are all related to disassociation from physicality, so he subtracted the descriptions of physicality from himself, many of which he had already subtracted in his previous sport, in which he tended to resemble celestial bodies.
However, he left many remnants of it, such as the turning movement - and movement is one of the most characteristic attributes of bodies - as well as taking care of animals and plants, having compassion for them, and taking care to remove their obstacles, for these are also attributes of bodies; he first sees them only with a physical force and then labors over them with a physical force as well.
He began to discard all of this from himself, as it was all unbecoming of the state he was now seeking.
He remains confined to being still in the palace of his cave, hammering away, turning his eyes away from all senses and bodily forces, with his mind focused on the One who must exist alone and without company, and whenever his imagination has a chance to wander, he pushes it away with his effort and motivation and satisfies himself with this and persists in it for so long that several days pass without feeding or moving.
During the intensity of his struggle, he might lose sight of all things except his own self, which he would not lose sight of at the time he was absorbed in the sight of the true, omnipresent First Existence.
He was unhappy with this and knew it was a flaw in pure observation and a flaw in observation.
He continued to seek annihilation of himself and sincerity in watching the truth until he achieved this and lost sight of the heavens, the earth and everything in between, all spiritual images, bodily powers, and all powers that are separate from substances, which are the souls that know the true existence.
His own self is absent among all those selves, and the whole faded away into nothingness, leaving only the One True and Unchanging Existence.
He says: "Who is the one and only God who is omnipotent and omnipotent?
He understood his words and heard his call, and he was not prevented from understanding it by the fact that he did not know speech or speak.
He became absorbed in his condition and witnessed what no eye has seen, no ear has heard, and no human heart has thought of.
Do not attach your heart to the description of something that has not occurred to a human heart, for many things that may occur to human hearts cannot be described, let alone something that cannot occur to the heart and is neither in its realm nor in its phase.
By heart, I do not mean the body of the heart or the soul in its cavity, but rather the image of that soul that is overflowing with its power over the human body, for each of these three may be called a heart, but there is no way that this matter can occur to one of these three and can only be expressed in terms of what is dangerous to them.
Whoever seeks to express this state of affairs has sought the impossible, and is like someone who wants to taste the dyed colors as colors and asks for blackness to be, for example, sweet or sour.
However, we do not leave you without hints that hint at the wonders of the shrine in the form of an example rather than in the form of knocking on the door of the truth, because there is no way to verify what is in the shrine except by reaching it.
Now listen with the hearing of your heart and speak with the sight of your mind to what I am pointing out to you, so that you may find guidance from it that will lead you to the path of righteousness.
My condition is that you should not ask me at this time for a further oral statement on what I am depositing in these papers, for the field is narrow and the control of words on something that is not his business is dangerous.
I say that when he was separated from himself and all other selves and saw nothing in existence but the One, the Almighty, and witnessed what he saw, and then returned to observing the others, when he awoke from his drunken state, it occurred to him that he had no self other than the Self of the Truth, that the truth of his self is the Self of the Truth, and that the thing he first thought was his self other than the Self of the Truth is nothing in reality, but there is nothing but the Self of the Truth, and this is like sunlight falling on dense bodies and seeing it appear in them.
 Although it is attributed to the object in which it appears, it is really nothing other than sunlight.
If that object disappears, its light disappears and the light of the sun remains the same, neither decreasing when that object is present nor increasing when it is absent.
Whenever there is a body that can accept that light, it accepts it, but if there is no body, that acceptance is meaningless.
This belief was strengthened by the fact that he had realized that the Self of the Almighty does not multiply in any way, and that His knowledge of Himself is His very Self.
It follows from this that whoever has knowledge of himself has knowledge of himself.
He had the knowledge and he had the self.
This self can only occur at its own self and the very act of its occurrence is the self, so it is the self itself.
And so are all the disembodied selves who know this true Self, which he first saw as many, and which have become one and the same thing.
He realized that the suspicion had arisen from the remnants of the darkness of bodies and the darkness of the senses, because many, few, one, unity, combination, gathering and separation are all attributes of bodies, and those separate selves who know the Self of the Truth - the Almighty - because of their innocence of matter cannot be said to be many or one, because many is only the difference of selves from one another.
 Unity is also only possible through connection.
None of this can be understood except in composite meanings that are embedded in matter.
However, the phrase here may be too narrow, because if you express these separate selves in the plural, as we do here, it would imply that they are many, and they are not many.
If you express it in the singular, it implies union, which is impossible for her.
It is as if one of the bats whose eyes are darkened by the sun moves in the chain of his madness and says: "You have gone so far in your scrutiny that you have departed from the instinct of the rational and thrown out the rule of reason; for it is the rule of reason that a thing is either one or many, so let him restrain himself and stop his tongue and accuse himself. Let him be restrained in his arrogance, restrain his tongue, accuse himself, and consider the lowly tangible world in which he is embedded, in the same way that Hayy ibn Yaqtan considered it when he looked at it with another eye and saw many, many, many, and unlimited, and then looked at it with another eye and saw it as one.
He remained undecided and couldn't decide between one description and the other.
The tangible world is the source of plurality and singularity, separation and connection, localization and heterogeneity, agreement and disagreement, so what do we think of the divine world, in which neither whole nor part is said, and in which no audible word is uttered, except for the illusion of something other than the truth, which is not known except by those who witness it, and whose truth is proven only by those who have been in it.
The mind that he and his ilk are referring to is the talking power that browses through tangible objects and extracts the overall meaning from them. The mind that he and his ilk are referring to is the talking power that browses through tangible objects and extracts the overall meaning from them.
 The sane people he is referring to are the ones who take this view.
The pattern we are talking about is above all this, so let those who know only the senses and their faculties turn a deaf ear to it, and refer to his team of those who know the outward appearance of the worldly life, but are oblivious to the hereafter.
If you are one of those who are satisfied with this kind of hint and reference to what is in the divine world and do not load our words with the meanings that they are accustomed to loading them with, we will add to you something of what Hayy ibn Yaqzaan witnessed in the place of the first of the truthful, which was mentioned above. After pure absorption, complete annihilation, and the truth of arrival, he saw the supreme ark, which has no body, and he saw a self that is innocent of matter, which is not the self of the One True, nor is it the self of the ark, nor is it anything else, like the image of the sun that appears in a mirror, which is neither the sun nor the mirror, nor is it anything else.
He saw the self of that ark in all its perfection, splendor, and beauty, which is too great to be described with a tongue and too subtle to be clothed with a letter or sound, and he saw it in the utmost pleasure, delight, and joy at the sight of the true Self, Glory be to Him.
He also saw for the next astronomy - the astronomy of the fixed planets - a self that is also innocent of matter, neither the self of the True One, nor the self of the higher astronomy, nor itself, nor anything else, as if the image of the sun that appears in a mirror had been reflected to it from another mirror opposite the sun.
He saw this self also as pompous, beautiful, and pleasing as that of the higher sphere.
He also saw for the next astronomy, which is the astronomy of Saturn, an immaterial self that was neither one of the animals he had seen before nor another, like the image of the sun that appears in a mirror reflected from a mirror opposite the sun, and he also saw for this self the same splendor and pleasure that he had seen for the previous one.
He still sees for each astronomy a separate self that is innocent of matter and is neither one of the previous selves nor another, like the image of the sun reflecting from mirror to mirror, arranged in order according to the order of the planets.
He saw for each of these selves such beauty, splendor, pleasure, and joy as no eye has seen, no ear has heard, and no human heart has thought of, until he came to the world of the universe and corruption, which is all the stuffing of the moon's orbit, and saw a self that is free from matter and is neither one of the selves that he had seen before it, nor is it anything else.
This Self has seventy thousand faces with seventy thousand mouths, and in each face there are seventy thousand mouths, and in each mouth there are seventy thousand tongues that praise, sanctify, and glorify the One True Self without ceasing.
He saw for this self, which he imagined to be many and not many, the same perfection and pleasure as he had seen for the one before it.
It is as if this self is the image of the sun appearing in the swirling water, reflected from the last of the mirrors to which the reflection ended, in the order of the first mirror that met the sun itself.
Then he saw a different self, and if the seventy-thousand-faceted self could be a part of it, we would say that it was a part of it.
If it were not for the fact that this self happened after it wasn't there, we would say that it is her!
If it wasn't specific to his body when it happened, we would say that it didn't happen.
In this rank, he has seen selves like himself in objects that were and then ceased to exist and in objects that are still with him in existence, which are so numerous that they are infinitely numerous if they can be said to be many or all united if they can be said to be one.
He saw for himself and for those who are in his rank of beauty, splendor, and infinite pleasure what no eye has seen, no ear has heard, and no human heart has thought of, nor can it be described by those who describe it, nor can it be comprehended except by those who are knowledgeable.
He saw many beings who were separated from matter as if they were rusty mirrors that had been corrupted by slag, yet they turned their faces away from the clear mirrors in which the image of the sun was projected.
He saw the ugliness and imperfection of these souls that he had never imagined, and saw them in endless pain and sorrow, surrounded by a marquee of torment, burned by the fire of the veil, and posted with saws between discomfort and attraction.
He looked closely at it and saw a great horror, a great calamity, an intense creation, eloquent judgments, leveling, blowing, creating, and copying.
His senses came back to him, and he awoke from his trance-like state, and his foot slipped from that position, and the sensible world appeared to him, and the divine world was absent from him; for the two could not meet in the same state.
If you say, "It appears from what you have narrated from this sighting that the separate selves, if they are of an ever-present body that does not corrupt, such as the planets, are ever-present, and if they are of a corruptible body, such as a talking animal, they are corrupted, decayed, and vanished, as exemplified in the mirrors of reflection, for the image is stable only by the stability of the mirror, and if the mirror is corrupted, the image is corrupted and decayed," I say to you. How quickly you forget the covenant and dissolve the link.
We did not present to you that the field of expression here is narrow and that words in any case create the illusion of something other than the truth, and that which you have created by making the example and the represented the same in all respects.
The sun, its light, its image, its shape, mirrors, and the images in them are all things that are inseparable from bodies and are only sustained by them and in them.
 Therefore, it is dependent on it for its existence and invalidated by its invalidity.
As for the divine selves and the divine spirits, they are all innocent of bodies and their appendages, and they are completely detached from them, so they have no connection or attachment to them.
In addition to them, bodies are null and void, whether they exist or exist or not, but their connection and attachment is to the One True Self, who is their beginning, beginning, cause, and creator, and who gives them permanence and extends them by survival and perpetuity.
If they could not exist, the bodies would not exist, as they are their beginnings, just as if the One True Self could not exist, all these selves would not exist, nor would the bodies, nor would the entire sensory world, and there would be no existence, as everything is connected to each other.
Although the tangible world is a shadow of the divine world, and the divine world is independent of it and innocent of it, it is nevertheless impossible to impose its non-existence, since it inevitably belongs to the divine world, but its corruption is to be altered and not to be eliminated altogether, and this is how the dear Book speaks wherever this meaning occurs from it in changing the mountains and making them like grass and people like brushes and the sun and moon and exploding the seas on the day when the earth is changed from the earth and the heavens.
This is as much as I have been able to tell you about what Hayy ibn Yaqzaan saw in that honorable place, so do not seek to add to it from the point of view of words, for this is impossible.
When he returned to the tangible world after his wanderings, he was tired of the costs of the worldly life and his longing for the ultimate life intensified, so he sought to return to that place in the way he had first sought it, until he reached it more easily than the first endeavor and lasted longer in it again than in the first.
Then he returned to the world of sense.
 Then he had to reach his shrine afterward, which was easier for him than the first two and lasted longer.
The access to that honorable place became easier and the permanence of it became longer and longer until he could reach it whenever he wished and could not leave it except when he wished, so that he stayed in that place and never departed from it except for the necessities of his body, which he had minimized until there was no less.
In all of this, he wants God to relieve him from all his body, which calls him to leave his position, so that he may always be free of his pleasure and free from the pain he feels when he turns away from his position to the necessity of the body.
