It remained that way until seven weeks after its creation, which was fifty years ago.
At that time, he came into the company of Absal, and his story with him was as follows, God willing.
They mentioned that an island near the island where Hayy bin Yaqzaan was born, according to one of the two different sayings about the nature of his beginning, was transmitted to him by one of the true religions taken from some of the advanced prophets, may Allah bless them.
It was a religion that imitated all real things with parables that gave the illusions of those things and fixed their images in the souls according to the customary way of addressing the public, and that religion continued to spread in that island and strengthened and appeared until its king made it and made people adhere to it.
Two young men of virtue and desire for goodness had grown up in that island, one called Absal and the other Salaman. They received that religion and accepted it in the best way, and took upon themselves to abide by all its laws and observe all its deeds, and accompanied them in this way.
At times, they would discuss the words of the Shari'ah on the attributes of God, His angels, and the attributes of the return, reward and punishment.
As for Absal, he was more inward-looking, more spiritual, and more willing to interpret.
As for Salaman, his companion, he was more likely to keep to the obvious, more distant from interpretation, and less likely to act and ponder.
Both of them are diligent in outward actions, self-examination, and struggle against temptation.
In that Shari'ah, there were sayings in favor of isolation and solitude and indicating that victory and survival are in them, and other sayings in favor of cohabitation and group companionship.
Absal was eager to seek solitude and favored it due to his nature of constant thought, constant reflection, and diving into meanings, and his hope for this was more likely to be realized in solitude.
Salaman was attached to the group and preferred to speak in it because of his natural cowardice in thinking and acting.
This is what keeps him from obsessing, eliminates interfering doubts, and protects him from the whispers of the devils.
Their disagreement on this view was the cause of their parting.
Absal had heard about the island where Hayy ibn Yaqzan was said to have been formed, and he knew that it was fertile, full of facilities and moderate air, and that being alone there would enable him to fulfill his quest, so he resolved to travel to it and retire there for the rest of his life.
He gathered what money he had and bought a boat to carry him to that island and distributed the rest among the poor. He said goodbye to his friend Salaman and boarded the sea, and the sailors carried him to that island, put him on its coast, and separated from it.
Absal remained on that island, worshipping, glorifying and sanctifying God, and thinking about His beautiful names and supreme attributes, so that his mind would not be interrupted or his thoughts would not be disturbed.
If he needed food, he ate the fruits and game of that island to satisfy his hunger.
He stayed in this state for a while, in full bliss and the greatest pleasure in talking to his Lord.
Every day, he witnessed his kindnesses and the advantages of his favors and the ease with which he was able to obtain food and nourishment, which confirmed his certainty.
During that period, Hayy ibn Yaqzan was so absorbed in his noble shrines that he only left his cave once a week to eat whatever food was available; that is why Absal did not find him at first sight, but he used to roam around that island and wander around it without seeing a human being or a trace, thus increasing his solitude and expanding his soul for what he had resolved to seek solitude.
In some of those times, Hayy ibn Yaqzaan went out to seek his lunch and Absal had come to that area, and they saw each other.
As for Absal, he did not doubt that he was a recluse who arrived in that island to seek solitude from people as he had arrived there.
He feared that if he was exposed to him and recognized him, he would be a cause of corruption and an obstacle between him and his hope.
As for Hayy ibn Yazan, he did not know what it was because he did not see it in the form of any of the animals he had seen before.
He had a black armor of hair and wool on him, so he thought it was normal clothing.
He stood and marveled at it for a long time.
 Absal ran away from him, fearing that he would distract him from his situation, and Hayy ibn Yaqzan followed him because of his nature to search for truths.
When he saw him running away, he hid himself from him and hid himself from him until Absal thought he had gone away from him and moved away from that side.
Absal began praying, reading, supplicating, crying, supplicating, and being present until it distracted him from everything.
So Hayy ibn Yaqzan approached him a little by little, unaware of him, until he approached him, so that he could hear his recitation and praise, and witness his submission and weeping, and he heard a good voice and organized letters, the like of which he had not known from any animal.
He looked at its shapes and layout and saw it in his own image and realized that the armor on him was not natural leather but a garment made like his own.
When he saw the goodness of his reverence, supplication, and weeping, he did not doubt that he was one of those who know the truth. He longed for him and wanted to see what he had and what caused his weeping and supplication, so he approached him more and more until Absal sensed him, and he ran harder, and Hayy ibn Yaqzan ran after him until he joined him - because Allah had given him strength and power in knowledge and body - and held on to him, and he could not get out of the way.
When Absal looked at him, clothed in the skins of animals with horns, and his hair was long enough to cover much of him, and he saw that he had the speed of a runner and the strength of a killer, he was very frightened of him and began to plead with him in words that Hayy bin Yaqzan neither understood nor knew what they were, except that he recognized in them the characteristics of alarm. He comforted him with sounds he had learned from animals, ran his hand over his head, stroked his brow, flattered him, and showed him joy.
Until Absal calmed down and knew that no harm would come to him.
He used to speak to Hayy ibn Yaqzan and ask him about his affairs in every tongue he knew and tried to understand him, but he could not, and Hayy ibn Yaqzan wondered at what he heard and did not know what it was, but he showed him kindness and acceptance, so both of them were astonished.
Absal had a remnant of Zadad that he had brought from Al-Jazira Al-Mamara, so he brought it to Hayy ibn Yazan, but he did not know what it was because he had not seen it before.
Hayy ibn Yaqzan thought about the conditions he had imposed on himself for eating food and did not know the origin of that thing that was offered to him, what it was, and whether it was permissible for him to eat it or not. He refrained from eating.
Absal kept begging and pleading with him.
Hayy ibn Yaqzaan was fond of him and feared that if he continued to refuse, he would confuse him, so he gave him the food and ate it.
When he tasted it and liked it, it seemed to him that he had done badly by breaking his vows in the condition of food, and he regretted his action and wanted to separate from Absal and turn to his own business of seeking to return to his honorable position, but he could not, so he thought that he would stay with Absal in the world of sense until he knew the truth about his position and no longer had any inclination towards it.
When Absal also saw that he did not speak, he hoped that he would teach him speech, knowledge, and religion, so that he would have the greatest reward and closeness to Allah.
Absal began to teach him to speak by pointing to objects and saying their names, repeating this to him, and getting him to speak, so that he would say them in conjunction with the pointing until he taught him all the names and gradually taught him a little by little until he spoke in the shortest period of time.
Hayy ibn Yaqzan informed him that he did not know himself as a beginner, nor did he know his father or mother other than the doe who raised him, and he described to him his whole life and how he rose in knowledge until he reached the degree of arrival.
When Absal heard from him the description of those realities and selves that are beyond the realm of sense and know the Self of the Truth, the Almighty and Glorious, and the description of that Truth, the Almighty and Glorious, with its beautiful attributes and what he could describe of the pleasures of those who arrive and the pains of those who are blocked, Absal did not doubt that all the things mentioned in his Shari'ah about Allah, His angels, His books, His messengers, the Last Day, the Paradise and Hell are examples of those things that he had witnessed. The sight of his heart was opened, the fire of his mind was ignited, and the reasonable and the transmitted corresponded to each other, and the way of interpretation was closer to him, and there was no longer a problem in the Shari'ah that was not clear to him, nor was there any mystery that was not open, and he became one of the first of the righteous.
Then he looked at Hayy ibn Yaqzan with a sense of honor and reverence, and realized that he was one of the guardians of Allah, on whom there is no fear or grief.
He was obliged to serve him, follow his example, and take his advice in matters that conflicted with the legal acts that he had learned in his religion.
Hayy ibn Yaqzan made him inquire about him and his affairs, so Absal described to him the affairs of his island, the world in it, and how they behaved before the arrival of the religion to them.
 And how it is now that it has reached them.
He described to him all that is mentioned in the Shari'ah, including the description of the divine world, paradise, hell, rebirth, resurrection, hashkar, reckoning, the scale, and the path.
Hayy ibn Yaqzaan understood all this and saw nothing in it unlike what he had seen in his honorable position.
He knew that the one who described this and came with it was right in his description and truthful in his words, a messenger from his Lord, so he believed in him, believed him, and testified to his message.
He described to him prayer, zakat, fasting, pilgrimage, and the like in terms of visible deeds, and he received this and committed himself to performing it in compliance with the command that he had been told was true.
However, two things remained in his mind that he wondered about and did not know the wisdom of them; one of them is: "Why did this Prophet give examples to people in most of the things he described about the divine world and refrain from revelation until people fell into a great matter of anthropomorphism and believing things in the truth that he is divested of and innocent of, as well as in the matter of reward and punishment.
The other thing is why he confined himself to these duties and functions of worship and allowed the acquisition of wealth and expansion of food so that people would be free to engage in falsehood and turn away from the truth.
His opinion was that no one should eat anything but what sustained them, and money had no meaning to him.
 He used to see the provisions in the Shari'ah regarding money, such as zakat and its complexity, sales, usury, hudud, and punishments, and he used to find all of them strange and long-winded.
When the boy saw her in that state, he was very distressed, and his soul almost overflowed with sorrow for her.
He says If people understood the matter as it really is, they would turn away from these falsehoods and accept the truth, and they would be free from all this, and no one would have any jurisdiction over money whose zakat would be asked for, or whose hands would be cut off for stealing it, or whose souls would go to take it openly.
He did not realize how dull, imperfect, ill-informed, and weak-minded people are, and that they are like sheep, but they are even more misguided.
He negotiated with his friend Absal and asked him if he could use a trick to reach them, and he informed him of their lack of nature and disregard for God's command, but he was unable to understand this and remained attached to what he had hoped for.
Absal also hoped that Allah would guide a group of his acquaintances who were closer to getting rid of them than others, so he helped him with his opinion and they decided to stick to the coast of the sea and not leave it day or night, so that Allah might make it possible for them to cross the sea, so they did so and prayed to Allah to guide them.
It was a matter of God's command that a ship at sea lost its way and was pushed by the winds and the crashing waves to its coast.
When it was near land, its people saw the two men on the shore, so they approached them, and Absal spoke to them and asked them to carry them with them.
He told them about Hayy ibn Yaqzaan, and they were very fond of him and made a big deal out of him and gathered around him, magnifying and venerating him.
Absal informed him that this sect is closer to understanding and intelligence than all people and that if he is unable to teach them, he is even more unable to teach the public.
The head of that island was Salaman, who was the owner of Absal, who believed in community and prohibited isolation, so Hayy ibn Yaqzan began to teach them and spread the secrets of wisdom to them.
But when he went a little beyond the surface and began to describe what they had already understood, they turned away from him, disgusted by what he said, and resented him in their hearts, even though they showed him satisfaction in his face out of honor for his strangeness and consideration for the right of their friend Absal.
Hayy ibn Yaqzan continued to appeal to them day and night and to show them the truth, both secretly and openly, but this only made them more prophetic and alienated, although they were lovers of good and desirous of the truth, but due to their imperfect nature, they did not seek the truth from a way, nor did they take it in the direction of its realization or seek it from its door, but did not want to know it through its owners, so he despaired of reforming them and his hope for their goodness was cut off due to their lack of acceptance.
After that, he looked at the classes of people and saw that each party had taken their god as their whims and their idol as their lusts, and that they had been distracted by all the worldly goods and distracted by the multiplication of wealth until they visited the graveyards.
As for wisdom, they have no access to it and have no interest in it; they are overwhelmed by ignorance and their hearts are blinded by what they used to gain, and God has sealed their hearts, their hearing and their eyesight, and they have a great torment.
When he saw that the torment had surrounded them, the darkness of the veils had enveloped them, and all of them - except the few - clung to their religion only by the world, and they had left their light and easy deeds behind, bought them for a small price, and were distracted from the remembrance of Allah by trade and selling, and did not fear a day when hearts and eyes would turn, it was clear to him and certain for certain that it was not possible to speak to them by way of revelation. That it is not possible to communicate with them by way of revelation, and that assigning them more than this amount of work is not compatible, and that the majority of the public's benefit from the Shari'ah is only in their worldly life, so that they may have their own livelihood and not encroach on anyone else in what they have been assigned to do, and that none of them win eschatological happiness except the rare anomaly who wants to plow the Hereafter and strive for it while believing in the Shari'ah.
As for those who are arrogant and prefer the worldly life, hell is their abode.
If you look at his deeds from the time he awakens from his sleep until the time he returns to sleep, you will not find anything in them that does not seek to attain one of these lowly, tangible things; either money he gathers, or pleasure he obtains, or lust he satisfies, or a cover he sponges off of, or an honor he achieves, or a deed of righteousness to adorn himself or defend his neck, all of which are darknesses one above the other in a deep sea.
When he understood the conditions of people and that most of them are like non-speaking animals, he knew that all wisdom, guidance, and success are in what the messengers have spoken and the Shari'ah has prescribed; nothing else is possible and no more can be added to it, for every work has its own men and every man is suited to what he is created for. This is the Sunnah of Allah in those who have gone before, and you will not find an alternative to the Sunnah of Allah.
I don't want something as such, I want something that is specific to this place, which I find I can't do without for the life of me, and to which I was born in the first place.
He saw that he was nothing more than one of these bodies, and this contemplation showed him that all bodies are one and the same thing, both animate and inanimate, moving and still, but it appears that some of them have actions by means of machines, and he does not know whether these actions are intrinsic to them or are passed on to them from others.
When he touched it, it burned his hand and he was unable to grasp it, so he decided to take a piece of it that was not completely consumed by the fire, so he took the healthy end of it and the fire in the other end, which he did, and carried it to the place where he had been sheltering.
He cut off his wings and tail as they were, opened their feathers and flattened them, flayed the rest of his skin, separated it into two pieces, tied one of them on his back and the other on his navel and under it, attached the tail behind him, and attached the wings to his biceps, which gave him cover, warmth and prestige among all the beasts so that they did not dispute or oppose him.
We thought that we would give them a glimpse of the secret of secrets in order to attract them to the side of the investigation and then repel them from that path, and we did not, however, leave what we have deposited in these few papers of secrets from a thin veil and a gentle curtain that is quickly violated for those who deserve it and condensed for those who do not deserve to exceed it so as not to exceed it.
He went back to Salaman and his companions and apologized for what he had spoken to him and disowned him. He informed them that he had seen the same opinion as them and was guided by the same path as them, and recommended them to stick to what they were doing in terms of adhering to the limits of the Shari'ah and the apparent deeds, not to delve into what does not concern them, to believe and accept the similarities, to reject innovations and whims and to follow the example of the righteous predecessors and abandon the novelties of the things.
He ordered them to avoid the practice of the common people of neglecting the Shari'ah and focusing on the world, and warned them against it with the utmost caution.
He and his companion, Absal, knew that this sought-after sect could not be saved except by this path, and that if they were removed from it to the realms of clairvoyance, they would not be able to join the ranks of the happy ones, and would wobble, relapse, and have a bad outcome.
If she continues in what she is until she reaches certainty, she will gain security and will be from the Companions of the Right, and as for the former, those are the close ones.
They said goodbye to them, separated from them, and were kind enough to return to their island until Allah, the Almighty, made it easy for them to cross to it.
Hayy ibn Yaqzan sought his honorable place in the manner in which he first sought it until he returned to it, and Absal followed his example until he came close to it, and they worshipped Allah in that island until they came to certainty.
This is the story of Hayy ibn Yaqzaan, Absal and Salman, which contains a piece of speech that is not found in a book or heard in the usual discourse, and it is from the hidden knowledge that only people who know Allah accept it and only people who are unaware of it are unaware of it.
We did not follow the path of the righteous Salaf in caring for it and being greedy for it.
However, what has made it easier for us to reveal this secret and pierce the veil is the corrupt opinions that have emerged in our time from the philosophers of the age, and they have declared them until they spread in the countries and their harm is widespread, and we feared that the weak people who rejected the imitation of the prophets - may Allah bless them - and wanted to imitate the fools and idiots would think that these opinions are the secrets that are confided to others and thus increase their love and fondness for them.
I ask my brothers who read this speech to accept my excuse for my leniency in explaining and tolerance in fixing it, for I did not do so except because I climbed to heights that are difficult to see, and I wanted to minimize the speech in a way that encourages people to enter the path.
I ask Allah for forgiveness and pardon, and that He may grant us knowledge of Him in the purest form, as He is gracious and merciful.
May peace be upon you, my brother, and may God's mercy and blessings be upon you.
