Just as if you generated a speech in asceticism and exhorting people, and then said, "This is from the words of Bakr ibn Abdullah al-Miznah, Amer ibn Abd Qais al-Anbari, Mu'araq al-Ajali, and Yazid al-Raqashi," it would have doubled its beauty, and that lineage would not have given it a freshness and elevation that it did not have.
If you say Abu Ka'ab al-Sufi, Abd al-Mumin, Abu Nawas, the poet, or Hussein al-Khalili said it, it would only have what it has in itself, and it would be wrong to underestimate it, and thus underestimate its right.
We have written for you many hadiths that are attributed to their owners and many hadiths that are not attributed to their owners, either by fearing them or by honoring them.
Abu al-Aswad al-Du'ali, who was a wise, literary, and shrewd man, forbade this newborn existence of yours and this newfound generosity, and said to his son: "If God extends your livelihood, extend it, and if He takes it away, contract it, and do not strive with God, for God is more generous than you."
Thamama said: "I have never seen a rooster in a country except that he never takes the grain with his beak, and then spits it out in front of the hen, except for the roosters of Maru, for I have seen the roosters of Maru rob the hens of the grain in their beaks.
Our companions claimed that the Khurasanians were in a house together, and they were patient without a lamp for as long as possible. Then they argued and quarreled, and one of them refused to help them and enter into the fines with them.
When they bought the meat, they divided it up before cooking, and each man took his share and tied it with a string or thread, and then sent it into the vinegar and spices of the pot.
Then they gather their threads. If they reattach, they reattach those threads, because they have imbibed the fat and have been watered.
However, they choose squash because it lasts for days and is less likely to spoil.
I borrowed it from another neighbor. The Khorasani soon heard the meat sizzling in the frying pan and smelled the cooking. He said to me, "I'm angry.
"If you had told me that you wanted it for meat or fat, I would have rushed to you with it, but I feared that you wanted it for frying, and the iron of a frying pan burns if what is fried in it is not fat.
He was a corrector, far from corruption, bribery, and judging by whim, and he was very careful, as was he in his constipation, his miserliness, and his frugality in his expenditures; he ate only what was necessary, and drank only what seemed to be necessary.
If he finds the custodian of that orchard, he throws him a dirham, then says: "Buy me with this, or give me with this "Buy me with this, or give me with this, Rutab (if it is in the time of Rutab), or grapes (if it is in the time of grapes) and say to him Do not favor me, but do me a favor, for if you do, I will not eat it, and I will not return to you.
He ate everything he had with him and everything he had brought, then he pickled himself, washed his hands, and then walked a hundred steps.
 Then he lays down his side and sleeps until Friday.
Then he wakes up, washes up, and goes to the mosque.
Sajadah, Abu Sa'id Sajadah, said People of the Marawzah, if they wear moccasins in the six months in which they do not take off their moccasins, walk on the chests of their feet for three months, and on the heels of their feet for three months, so that it is as if they had only worn their moccasins for three months, for fear that the soles of their moccasins would be stripped or pierced.
He said She married her daughter when she was twelve years old, dressed her in gold and silver, clothed her in marwi, washi, silk and silk, and hung saffron and pounded perfume, and magnified her in the eyes of the betrothed, and raised her esteem among the intimate ones.
He said By Allah, you were not wealthy in the past, nor did you inherit it recently, and you are not a traitor to yourself, nor to your father's wealth, unless you have stumbled upon a treasure.
Her husband said to her: "May Allah confirm your opinion and guide you, and may Allah be pleased with the one to whom you are a home, and bless the one to whom you are an alpha.
I read on Hisham ibn Muhammad al-Kalibi in the year 201 that he said that my father and others, whose hadiths have all been corroborated, said that when Ishmael, the son of Abraham, peace be upon him, settled in Makkah and many children were born there, until they filled Makkah and banished those who were there from Amalek, Makkah became narrow and wars and hostilities occurred between them, and some of them drove each other out, and they wandered about the countryside to seek livelihoods.
Abu al-Mundhir said: Hisham Muhammad narrated from Abu Salih from Ibn 'Abbaas that Isaf and Naela was a man from Jurhum, called Isaf the son of Ya'la, and Naela was the daughter of Zayd from Jurhum, whom he used to love in the land of Yemen. They came as pilgrims and entered the Kaaba, and finding that people were asleep and alone in the house, they had an affair with her in the house, so they were mutilated, and in the morning they found them mutilated, so they took them out and put them in their place, and Khuzayyah and Quraysh and all the Arabs who made the pilgrimage to the house afterward worshipped them.
These are the five idols that were worshipped by the people of Noah, which Allah the Almighty mentions in His Book in what He revealed to His Prophet (peace be upon him) {Noah said, "Lord, they disobeyed me and followed him whose wealth did not increase his wealth but made him a great loss. and his child did not increase his wealth and his child except as a loss, and they devised a great cunning, and they said, "Do not leave your gods and goddesses, nor do you leave Wad, Sawaa, Yaghut, Ya'quq and Nasr, for they have led many astray, and do not add to the wrongdoers more than they have lost their way.
They did not think of the five idols that Amr ibn Lahi pushed, which Allah, the Exalted, mentioned in the Glorious Qur'an when He said, "Do not leave Wad, Sawaa, Yaghuth, Ya'quq and Nasr." Their opinion of these is not close to the same.
I thought that was because she was far away from them.
If they suspect a newborn, they give him a gift and then strike a balloon, and if an explicit one comes out, they attach it, and if an adhesive one comes out, they push it away.
One against the dead, one against the marriage, and three that were not explained to me as to what they were.
If they had a dispute about something or wanted to travel or do something, they would come to him and swear by the bowls before him, and whatever came out, they would act on it and follow it.
When the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) appeared on the day of the conquest of Mecca, he entered the mosque while the idols were set up around the Ka'ba, and he poked his bow into their eyes and faces and said, "The truth has come and the falsehood has vanished." Then he ordered them to be burned on their faces, and then they were taken out of the mosque and burned.
Some of them made a house, some of them made an idol, and some of them made an idol, and those who could not afford it or to build a house set up a stone in front of the sanctuary and in front of others that they liked, and then circumambulated it as they circumambulated the house, and they called them erections.
When he brought them close to him, they fled from him, and he was shedding blood on them, so they went in every direction and dispersed, and he was sorry, so he picked up a stone and threw it at him and said, "God has not blessed you with a god who has dispersed my camels from me.
Abu Ali al-Anazi said, "Ali al-Sabah said, "Abu al-Munther Hisham son of Muhammad son of Muhammad son of al-Saibi al-Kalibi said, "My father told me that the first thing that idols were worshipped was that when Adam, peace be upon him, died, the sons of Sheth son of Adam put him in a cave in the mountain on which Adam landed in the land of India.
The mountain is called Noot, and it is the most fertile mountain in the land.
Barahuta is a valley in Hadramawt, near a village called Tinah.
Al-Hasan ibn 'Alil said: 'Ali ibn al-Sabah said: Abu al-Mundhir said: "Wad, Sawa, Yagharth, Ya'aq and Nasr were righteous people who died in a month.
 Their relatives mourned for them.
A man from the sons of Qabil said, "O my people, may I make you five idols in their images, except that I cannot make souls in them?"
They said, "Yes!" Yes!
 So he carved five idols in their images and set them up for them.
Then another century came and they worshipped them even more than the first century.
Then the third century came after them, and they said The first of us did not honor these people, except that they hoped to intercede for them with Allah.
They worshipped them, and their disbelief became great and intense.
God sent Idris, peace be upon him, (who was Enoch, son of Yared, son of Mahliel, son of Qinan) as a prophet. He called them, but they disbelieved him, so God elevated him to a high place.
The wise men said One of the duties of a friend to a friend is to overlook his missteps and forgive his misdeeds, and if he returns and repents, otherwise you should reproach him without excessive reproach, for too much reproach is a precursor to estrangement.
Likewise, the spiritual selves and the unifying power of all without detail is the divine power that emanated in all existences, both macro and micro, and gathered and surrounded them in every way, neither in terms of appearance, nor in terms of invisibility, nor in terms of form, nor in terms of matter, for all is one and the same divine self, which is in fact one and simple, and the consideration is detailed, like the human being with the animal.
 Don't you see that they are included in it and exist as it.
Sometimes they represent it by the genus with the species, in every existence, as mentioned above, and sometimes by the whole with the part, in the manner of the example.
What appears from Ibn Dehqan's words in establishing this doctrine is that the truth of what they say about unity is similar to what the sages say about colors, that their existence is conditional on light, and if there is no light, the colors do not exist in any way.
For them, all perceptible existences are conditional on the existence of the sensory perceiver, and even reasonable and imaginary existences are conditional on the existence of the mental perceiver, so all detailed existence is conditional on the existence of the human perceiver.
Heat, cold, hardness, softness, earth, water, fire, sky, and planets exist only because of the existence of the senses that perceive them, because the perceiver has made the perception detailed, which is not in what exists, but only in the perception. If the detailed perception is missing, there is no detail, only one perception, which is me and no other.
They consider this to be the case of the sleeper, for if he falls asleep and loses the apparent sense, he loses all sense except what is detailed to him by the imagination.
They said, "So the awakened person only considers all these perceptions in detail with the type of human perception, and if he loses a perception, he loses the detail, and this is the meaning of their saying illusion, not illusion, which is part of human perception.
This is the summary of their opinion as understood from the words of Ibn Dehghan, and it is extremely fallacious because we are certain of the existence of the country we are traveling to and from, even though it is absent from our eyes, as well as the existence of the sky, the planets and all other things that are absent from us.
However, the late mystics say that upon revelation, the seeker may have the illusion of this unity, which they call Maqam al-Jamal, and then progress from there to distinguishing between things, and they express this as Maqam al-Difar, which is the Maqam al-Araf, which is the position of the true knower.
Many of these late mystics, who talk about revelation and metaphysics, have gone too far in this regard. Many of them have gone to dissolution and unity, as we have pointed out, and filled the newspapers with it, such as al-Harawi in his Book of Maqamat and others.
They were followed by Ibn al-Arabi, Ibn Sabeen and their student Ibn al-Afif, Ibn al-Farid and Najm al-Israeli in their poems.
Their predecessors were mixed with the later Ismailis of the Rafidis, who also believe in dissolution and the divinity of the Imams, a doctrine that was not known to the first of them.
Ibn Sina referred to this in his book Al-Isharat fi Fadul al-Tasawwuf, saying: "It is impossible for the truth to be a law for everyone or to be known to anyone except one after the other.
This is a type of rhetoric, which is the same as what the Rafidites say and believe in.
Then they said that the order of the substitution after this pole is the same as what the Shiites said about the Captains.
Otherwise, Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) did not specialize among the Companions in any particular way of dress or condition.
Indeed, Abu Bakr and 'Umar (may Allah be pleased with them both) were the most ascetic people after the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace.
None of them specialized in religion, but all of the Sahabah were exemplary in religion, asceticism, and mujahideen.
What appears is that the mystics in Iraq, when the Ismailis emerged from the Shiites, and their discourse on the Imamate and what is related to it, which is well known, quoted from that the balance between the apparent and the internal, and made the Imamate for the policy of the successor in obedience to the Shari'ah, and singled him out so that no difference would occur as established in the Shari'ah.
Then they made the Qutb to teach knowledge of God because he is the head of the knowers, and they singled him out in order to resemble the Imam in appearance and to be on the same level as him in the interior, and they called him Qutb because the knowledge revolves around him.
This is evidenced by the words of these Sufis on the Fatimi matter and what they charged their books in this matter, in which the ancestors of the Sufis have no words of negation or affirmation, but are taken from the words of the Shiites and the Rafidis and their doctrines in their books.
There is nothing wrong with those who monotheize the truth while the images and monuments remain, but it is a part of "the good deeds of the righteous are the bad deeds of the near and dear ones."
Because that is what is required for restriction, servitude and intercession.
Whoever ascends to the position of the plural is a deficiency, even though he knows his rank, and that it is a confusion required by slavery and the witnesses, and cleansed from the filth of its occurrence by the eye of the plural.
If you know the meanings, there is no problem with the words.
What all of this implies is the realization of something above this phase, which is neither spoken nor reported.
That's enough of a hint.
The depth of this is a veil, which is what led to the well-known articles.
The words of Sheikh Abu Mahdi al-Zayyat.
As for talking about mujahideen and maqamat, the tastes that occur in their results, and holding oneself accountable for failing in their causes, there is no defense for anyone, and their tastes in them are correct, and realizing them is the ultimate happiness.
As for talking about the people's karamat, their knowledge of the unseen, and their control over things, it is valid and undeniable.
If some scholars tend to deny it, it is not the truth.
What Professor Abu Ishaq al-Asfaraini, one of the Ash'ariyya imams, invoked to deny it because it is confused with a miracle, the Sunni scholars distinguished between the two by challenging the miracle to occur in accordance with what he said, which is the claim that the miracle occurred according to what he said.
They said, "Then the occurrence of the miracle according to the liar's claim is not possible because the miracle's sign of truthfulness is mental, as the characteristic of itself is belief.
Many of these things happened to the Sahabah and the great predecessors, and they are well known.
As for talking about revelation, giving the truths of the upper realms, and the order in which beings come into being, most of their talk is a kind of similarity, since it is existential for them, and their lack of consciousness is independent of their tastes in it.
Languages do not give him an indication of what they mean by it because they are only meant for the commonplace and most of it is perceptible.
So we should not deal with their words in this regard and leave it with what we have left out of the similarities, and whoever Allah gives him the opportunity to understand some of these words in a way that is compatible with the manifestation of the Shari'ah, he will be happier with them.
The fairness of the matter is that they are people who are absent from the senses, and the imports possess them so that they speak about them what they do not intend, and the person who is absent is not addressed, and the one who is forced is excused.
Those who know of his virtue and imitation are held to the beautiful intention of this and similar things, and that the expression of the glories is difficult due to the lack of status, as happened to Abu Yazid al-Bastami and his ilk.
Whoever is not known for his virtue or fame is liable for what he says if we do not know what makes us interpret his words.
Anyone who speaks such words when he is present in his senses and does not own the situation is also culpable.
This is why jurists and great Sufis have ruled to kill al-Hallaj because he spoke in the presence of a person who is the owner of his condition.
God knows.
They think that it is an obstacle and a misfortune, that it is an accidental perception of the soul, and that existences are not limited to human perception.
God's knowledge is wider, His creation is greater, and His law of guidance is more powerful, so they do not utter anything from what they realize.
Rather, they prohibit delving into it and forbid their companions from delving into it and standing on it, but they adhere to their way as they were in the world of sense before the revelation, of following and imitating, and order their companions to do the same.
This science is one of the Shari'ah sciences, and it was introduced into the religion when the sciences became trades and people wrote in them.
As for the vision and its expression, it existed in the predecessors as well as in the successors.
It may have been in kings and nations before, but it did not reach us because it was limited to the words of the expressive people of Islam.
Otherwise, visions exist in all human beings and must be expressed.
Yusuf al-Siddiq, peace be upon him, used to interpret visions, as recorded in the Qur'an.
It has also been proven that the Prophet (peace be upon him) and Abu Bakr (may Allah be pleased with him) are aware of the unseen.
The reason why the vision is an awareness of the unseen is that the heart spirit, which is the gentle vapor emitted from the fleshy cavity of the heart, spreads in the arteries and with the blood throughout the body, and through it, the actions and sensations of the animal powers are completed.
If he becomes bored with the five senses and the discharge of the apparent powers, and the surface of the body is covered by the cold of the night, the spirit from all parts of the body is trapped to his heart center, so that he can recover to resume his work, and all the apparent senses are disabled, which is the meaning of sleep, as mentioned in the beginning of the book.
This heart spirit is the vehicle of the rational spirit of man, and the rational spirit is aware of all that is in the world of matter by itself, as it is the very essence of cognition.
