Likewise, considering the plant kingdom at large, he judged it must be one because of the universality of growth and nutrition
At this he joined plants and animals together in his mind, since they were alike in nutrition and growth, although the animals are higher than the plants in that they possess sense perception, locomotion, and sensation as well
Still plants seemed to have something roughly similar, as, for example, when flowers turn toward the sun, or roots towards food. 
 These considerations showed him that plants and animals are united by a single common entity, more perfectly represented in one and somehow impeded in the other. 
 It was as if water were divided, part running freely and part frozen over. 
 Thus he saw how animals and plants are one being
Next he investigated bodies that do not sense or feed or grow such as stones, earth, water, air, and flame. 
 He saw that these bodies are bounded in length, breadth, and depth, the sole differences among them being in terms of such contrarieties as that some were colored and others colorless; some hot, others cold
He perceived that warm bodies grow cold and cold ones hot; he watched water turn to steam, steam to water; burning things to embers, ashes, flame and smoke. 
 When rising smoke was trapped in a hollow, it precipitated and in its place appeared bits of solid, rather like earth. 
 This line of thinking, similar to the reasoning he had done on animals and plants, made evident to him that all physical things, despite the involvement of diversity in some respects, are one in reality
He then turned to that entity which in his belief united plants and animals. 
 It had to be a body with length, breadth and depth and, like any ordinary body that does not feed or perceive, either hot or cold. 
 The only differences between this archetypal living being and any inanimate objects, in fact, were the life functions it manifested through the use of \"tools\" in animals and plants. 
 But perhaps these functions were not properly theirs, but came in from some other being. 
 And if they came to other objects, perhaps these too would come to life
for at this stage the only beings he knew were physical. 
 In this way Hayy saw all being as one, although it had appeared at first glance boundless and without number
For some time he rested content at this stage. But then he began to wonder about all these physical things, both living and non-living, which seemed sometimes to be one, sometimes to be infinite in number and diversity. 
 He observed that all must either rise like smoke, flame, and air under water, or fall like water, particles of earth, and parts of plants and animals
All such bodies must move in either one direction or the other and not come to rest unless stopped by something, as when a falling rock hits hard ground and cannot break through—for if it could, it would obviously have gone on falling\" Thus you can feel it tugging downward against you if you try to lift it
In the same way Hayy found that smoke would not stop rising unless trapped; and even then it would curl around, left and right, and if there were an air passage, escape and continue rising, since air could not contain it
Hayy observed that if he filled a skin with air, tied it shut and pushed it under water it would try to wriggle free and rise until taken out and restored to air. 
 Then it would stop wriggling upwards and lie quite still
Hayy tried to find some body that neither rose nor fell or exerted no pull in either direction, but among the objects with which he was familiar he could find nothing of the kind. 
 He sought such an object purely in the hope of finding out what it was to be a body as such, free of all the qualities that give rise to plurality
After he had worn himself out looking, studying all the objects that bore the fewest predicates without finding one that could not be said to be either ‘heavy’ or ‘light’ as we express it, he began to investigate heaviness and lightness themselves. 
 Did they belong to bodies qua body, or did both arise from something distinct from the physical
It seemed plain to him that both must stem from some separate principle, for if they belonged to body in virtue of its being body, then every material object would have both
In fact, however, we know that heavy objects have no buoyancy, and light ones no gravity; yet they remain bodies all the same.  If not for this added factor, the two would be identical 
 Thus over and above physicality each has its own differentiating factor. 
 If not for this added factor, the two would be identical
Clearly the substantiality of objects both heavy and light was compounded of two factors, the physicality they have in common, and linked with it either gravity or buoyancy—that is what moves them either upwards or downwards and makes them different
Regarding all bodies, living and non-living in the same light, Hayy saw that the being of each of them was made up in the same way of corporeality plus some factor or factors. 
 Before him loomed the forms of physical things in all their diversity. 
 This was his first glimpse of the spiritual world. 
 For these forms cannot be apprehended by the senses, but only by reasoning
And as he was awakening to these things, it dawned on him that the animal spirit, which lives in the heart and at which he had first probed with his dissections, must itself have a principle over and above its corporeality which would enable it to carry out all its wonderful tasks, as true subject of the various modes of sensing, apprehending and moving. 
 This is the form which differentiates it from all other bodies. 
 Philosophers term it the animal soul
The same holds for plants\" whatever they have to fill the role of body-heat in animals would have its own special form, called by philosophers the vegetative soul
And even inanimate objects—that is all things in the world of generation and decay besides plants and animals—must have some special thing to make them behave in their own peculiar way, and give them their particular qualities to the senses and their ways of moving. 
 This is the form, or as philosophers call it, the nature of the thing
When Hayy understood, through this line of reasoning, that the substance of the animal spirit, toward which all his love had been directed, was compounded out of the corporeal factor and another, non-physical factor, and that it had the former in common with every other body, while the latter, linked with it, belonged exclusively to this spirit, he felt contempt for physicality. 
 He dropped the physical and his mind fastened on the other factor, which is called sim ply the soul. 
 He was now anxious to learn all he could about the soul Turning his thought in this direction, he started off by going over in his mind all physical objects, considered not as bodies but as having forms from which emerge their distinguishing characteristics
Following this up in many specific cases, he was able to see how a great number of bodies participate in a certain form, from which emanates a given mode or given modes of behavior. 
 Within this group a subclass, besides sharing the form of the rest, has an additional form from which further functions emerge. 
 A still smaller class displays both of these plus a third form, generating still more special behavior
For example, everything earthen, such as soil, rocks, minerals, plants, animals, and all other heavy objects, makes up a single totality which participates in a single form from which issues the tendency to fall when unimpeded or when lifted and let go
Plants and animals are a subclass of this group, but besides sharing this form with all the rest, they have an added form from which emanate the activities of nutrition and growth
Nutrition is an interchange by which the being nourished replaces matter that breaks down by ingesting material similar to itself and assimilating this to its own substance
Growth is movement in all three dimensions at once, according to a set proportion. 
 These two functions are universal among plants and animals and must therefore issue from a form shared by both plants and animals. 
 This form is what is called the vegetative soul
A still smaller subdivision, namely the animals, while sharing the first form with the whole group and the second with the subclass, surpasses both by the exclusive possession of a third form which gives rise to sensation and locomotion
Further, Hayy knew that every animal species had its own distinguishing characteristics. 
 He now understood that this differentiating principle stemmed from the species’ own distinctive form, superadded to the form it held in common with all other animals. 
 Each plant species had something similar
Plainly some of the objects of sense perception in the world of generation and decay were made up of many factors over and above physicality, while others had only a few. 
 He recognized that it would be easier to grasp the simpler than the more complex, so he decided, to start with, to try to understand whatever had the fewest components to its make-up. 
 Seeing that plants and animals must be composed of numerous factors because of the complexity of the tasks of life, he put off consideration of their forms for the present
By the same token he observed that some pieces of earth were simpler than others, so he directed his attention to the simplest of these he could obtain
Likewise he recognized that water must be very simple since so few activities issue from its form. 
 The same was true of fire and air
At first he had supposed not only that these four, fire, water, earth, and air, were interchangeable but also that all partook of one common entity, that is materiality, which was itself necessarily devoid of the factors which differentiate the four. 
 This must neither rise nor fall; it must be neither hot nor cold, moist nor dry. 
 For all these predicates are inapplicable to body qua body, since none is applicable to all bodies
Therefore if an object could exist which had no form beyond physicality, not one of these predicates would be true of it, and no predicate at all could apply to it which did not apply to all physical things, regardless of their form
He searched for someone characteristic common to all objects, animate and inanimate, but the only thing he could find in all physical objects was extension in three dimensions. 
 This he recognized belonged to physical things purely by virtue of the fact that they were physical. 
 But his senses did not so readily reveal any object with just this attribute of extension and no other
He then examined this notion of extension, asking himself whether it was just this that belonged to material things or whether there was not perhaps, some further principle; and he realized that behind extension there must be another factor in which extension itself was grounded. 
 For bare extension could no more subsist by itself than the extended object could exist without extension
Hayy tried out this idea on several form-bearing objects such as clay for example. 
 He found that if he molded clay into some shape, for example into a ball, it had length, width and depth in a certain ratio; if he then took this ball and worked it into a cube or egg shape, its length, width and depth took on different proportions. 
 But it was still the same clay; and, no matter what the ratio, it could not be divested of length, breadth, and depth. 
 The fact that one proportion could replace another made it apparent to him that the dimensions were a factor in their own right, distinct from the clay itself. 
 But the fact that the clay was never totally devoid of dimensions made it plain to him that they were part of its being
His experiment suggested to him that bodies, qua body, are really composed of two factors, one analogous to the clay of the example, the other to the length, width, and depth of the ball or block or other figure the clay might have
The truth was, he could not comprehend physical things at all unless he conceived of them as compounded of these two factors, neither of which can subsist without the other
The variable factor, which can present a succession of many different faces, that is extension, corresponds to the form of all other bodies. 
 The other factor, which remains constant like the clay of the example, corresponds to materiality in all other bodies
In philosophy the factor analogous to the clay is called hyle, or matter. 
 It is entirely devoid of forms
When his thinking had risen to this level and the sensory world had been left behind to some extent, just as he was mounting to a height from which he could gaze out toward the approaches of the world of mind, Hayy felt alien and alone. 
 He longed for the familiar world of the senses, balked at the notion of unqualified body, a thing he could neither perceive nor possess, and fell back on the simplest objects he could see, the four he had already singled out
He examined water first and found that if left to itself, determined only by its own form, it was perceptibly cold and downward-seeking; but if warmed by fire or the heat of the sun, first its coldness would pass, leaving only its proclivity to fall; then, if it were heated strongly, this too would vanish, and it would seek to rise, leaving it without either of the characteristics which had sprung from its form. 
 Yet all he knew of that form was that these functions issued from it
When they were gone the rule of that form must have ended. 
 The form of water must have left this body, since it now exhibited behavior characteristic of some other form. 
 A new form not previously present must have come into being here, giving rise to behavior unlike that it had shown under its original form. 
 Now Hayy knew by necessity that all that comes into being must have a cause. 
 From this consideration he gained a vague and general notion of the cause of this form
One by one he went over the forms he had known before and saw that all of them had come to be and all must have a cause
He then considered that in which the forms inhere and found it to be no more than a body’s propensity for such and such an action to arise from it. 
 Water, for example, has a propensity to rise when strongly heated. 
 This propensity is due to the form, for there is nothing there but body and certain perceptible things—qualities and ways of moving, for example—which come into being, and the cause who creates them. 
 Thus the proneness of a body to certain kinds of motion as opposed to others must be due to its disposition or form
Hayy realized that the same would be true of all forms. 
 Clearly the acts emerging from forms did not really arise in them, but all the actions attributed to them were brought about through them by another Being.
This idea to which he had now awakened is the meaning of the Prophet’s words\" \"I am the ears He hears by and the sight He sees by.
As it is written in the unshakable Revelation \"It was not you but God who killed them; and when you shot, it was not you who shot, but God.
Possessing now a broad if indistinct notion of this great Subject, Hayy found in himself a burning desire to know Him more fully. 
 But, having as yet not left the sensory world, he tried first to find this Cause among the objects of his senses. 
 Besides, he did not yet know whether He was one or many
Accordingly he scrutinized all the physical things he knew and to which his thinking had always been confined. 
 All of them, he perceived, develop and decay. 
 Those which are not destroyed completely are destroyed at least in part. 
 Water and earth, for example, are at least in part destroyed by fire. 
 Air too, he saw, can be destroyed by a severe chill and turn to snow or water
None of the physical things around him was exempt from change, thus none could exist without there being a cause of all this change. 
 Seeing that this was the case Hayy left behind all these things and turned his mind to the heavenly bodies.
He reached this level at twenty-eight, having completed four seven-year phases in his development. 
 He knew that the heavens and all the stars in the skies were bodies because without exception they were extended in three dimensions, and whatever is always extended in three dimensions is a body, therefore they were all bodies.
He wondered whether they extended infinitely in all directions or were finite, bounded at some point beyond which no extension was possible.
The problem perplexed him more than a little, but ultimately his inborn talent and brilliance led him to realize that an infinite body is something spurious which can neither be nor be conceived.
The problem perplexed him more than a little, but ultimately his inborn talent and brilliance led him to realize that an infinite body is something spurious which can neither be nor be conceived. 
 This conclusion was bolstered in his mind by a number of arguments that he reached quite independently in the course of his reflections. 
 This conclusion was bolstered in his mind by a number of arguments that he reached quite independently in the course of his reflections. 
 \"This heavenly body,\" he said to himself, \"is bounded on the near side, without doubt, since I can see it with my own eyes
Only the far side admits of doubt. 
 Nonetheless I know it is impossible for it to extend forever. 
 For if I imagine two lines beginning on this finite side, passing up through the body to infinity, as far as the body itself supposedly extends, and imagine a large segment cut from the finite end of one and the two placed side by side with the cut end of one opposite the uncut end of the other, and my mind travels along the two lines toward the so called infinite end, then I must discover either that the pair of lines really do extend to infinity, the one no shorter than the other, in which case the cut line equals the intact one, which is absurd.
or else that the one does not run the full length of the other, but stops short of the full course, in which case it is finite. 
 But if the finite segment that was. 
 subtracted is restored, the whole is finite. 
 Now it is neither shorter nor longer than the uncut line. 
 They must be equal then. 
 But one is finite, so the other must be finite as well— and so must the body in which these lines were assumed to be drawn. 
 Such lines can be assumed in any physical thing.
 Thus to postulate an infinitely extended physical body is fallacious and absurd.
Once the exceptional mind which had made him aware of such a remarkable argument had demonstrated to him the finitude of the heavens, Hayy wished to know what shape they had and how they were divided by their limiting surfaces.
To start with he watched the sun, moon and other stars, observing how all rose in the east and set in the west. T 
 Those which passed directly overhead inscribed a great arc; those inclining north or south from his zenith inscribed a smaller arc. 
 The further they lay from the zenith and the closer to the poles, the smaller the arc they described, the smallest orbits in which stars moved being those of Ursa Minor and Canopus, two little circles about the North and South Poles respectively.
Since Hayy’s home, as I mentioned at the outset, was on the equator, the orbital planes of all the stars were perpendicular to his horizon and their orbits equally large at a given deflection north and south. 
 What is more, both polar axes were visible to him. 
 He observed that when a star with a large orbit and one with a small one rose together, they also set together.
and seeing this repeated constantly with all stars, he realized that the firmament must be spherical. 
 The conviction was strengthened by his seeing the sun, moon and stars return to the east after disappearing in the west, and by the fact that their apparent sizes at rising, peak, and setting were constant. 
 For if their motion followed any path other than along a sphere, they would have to be closer to view at some times than at others, and if so their magnitudes or apparent sizes would vary. 
 They would seem bigger when closer than when farther off. 
 But since there was no such variation to be seen, he was certain that their motion was in a spherical course.
He continued to study the motion of the moon, observing that this was from west to east, and he even observed the retrograde motion of the planets. 
 Thus he eventually learned a great deal of astronomy. 
 He now knew that the courses of the stars could be set only in a number of spheres, all enclosed in one great sphere above them all, which moves the whole from east to west in a day and a night. 
 But to explain each step in his progress in astronomy would be a protracted task. 
 And this, after all, is treated at length in books. 
 For our purpose no more is needed than what I have already set down.
Having reached this point, Hayy understood that the heavens and all that is in them are, as it were, one being whose parts are all interconnected. 
 All the bodies he had known before such as earth, water, air, plants and animals were enclosed within this being and never left it. 
 The whole was like an animal. 
 The light-giving stars were its senses. 
 The spheres, articulated one to the next, were its limbs. 
 And the world of generation and decay within was like the juices and wastes in the beast’s belly, where smaller animals often breed, as in the macrocosm.
Seeing the whole universe as in reality one great being, and uniting all its many parts in his mind by the same sort of reasoning which had led him to see the oneness of all bodies in the world of generation and decay, Hayy wondered whether all this had come to be from nothing, or in no respect emerged from nothingness but always existed.
On this question he had many misgivings. 
 Neither position seemed to prevail.
For whenever he assumed the eternity of the universe, numerous difficulties arose due to the fact that any actual infinity could be shown to be impossible by the same sort of reasoning which had shown him the impossibility of an infinite physical body.
Besides he knew that the world could not exist without temporal events, thus it could not precede them. 
 But what cannot precede temporal events must itself come to be in time.
When, on the other hand, he assumed that the universe arose in time, other objections assailed him. 
 Thus he realized that the notion of the universe coming to be from nothing could be made sense of only in terms of a time before there was a universe—but time itself is an inseparable part of the universe. 
 Therefore it is inconceivable that, the origin of the universe came before the origin of time.
\"Furthermore,\" he said to himself, \"if the universe came to be in time, there must have been some cause to bring it into being. 
 Why did this Cause bring about a world now rather than before?
Had some outside force disturbed Him? 
 Nothing existed but He. 
 Had some change, then, occurred within Him?
But what brought about that change.
For some years Hayy pondered over this problem, but the arguments always seemed to cancel each other. 
 Neither position could outweigh the other.
Baffled and exhausted by this dilemma, he began to wonder what each of the beliefs entailed. 
 Perhaps the implications were the same.
For he saw that if he assumed that the universe had come to be in time, ex nihilo, then the necessary consequence would be that it could not have come into existence by itself, but must have had a Maker to give it being. 
 This Maker could not be perceptible to the senses; for if it could be apprehended by sense perception, then it would be a material body, and thus part of the world, itself in time and in need of a cause. 
 If this second cause were physical, it would need a third; the third, a fourth, and so ad infinitum —which is absurd.
Thus the world must have a non-corporeal Cause. 
 Since He is not a physical being there is no way of perceiving Him through the senses, as the five senses can grasp only physical objects and their attributes.
But if He cannot be perceived, He cannot be imagined either, since imagining is no more than the mind’s projection of images belonging to sense objects no longer present. 
 Furthermore, if He is not a material body, then it is impossible to apply to him any of the predicates of physical things. 
 Chief of these is extension in length, width, and depth. 
 He transcends these and all the physical characteristics that follow from them.
Finally as Maker of the universe He must know it and have sway over it\" \"Can it be that the Creator does not know? 
 He is Kindly and Aware.
Alternatively, Hayy saw that if he assumed the eternity of the world, that is that it had always been as it is now and not emerged from non-being, this would imply that its motion too was eternal and had never begun, never started up from rest.
Now every motion requires a mover. 
 This mover can be either a force distributed through some body, self-moving or externally moved, or a force which is not distributable or diffusible in physical bodies.
But the type of force which is diffused and distributed through material things is divided when they divide and augmented proportionately as they increase. 
 Weight, for example, in a stone is what causes its downward motion. 
 If the stone is split in half, so is its weight; and if another is added, equal to the first, the weight increases by an equal amount. 
 If it were possible to keep adding stones forever, then the weight would mount to infinity; but if the stones reached a certain number and stopped, then the weight would reach a corresponding point and stop.
Yet it has already been proved that every material body must be finite. 
 So every force in a material body must be finite.
Should we discover a force engaged in an infinite task, that force cannot belong to a physical thing. 
 But we have found the motion of the heavens to be ceaseless and eternal, for ex hypothesis it has gone on forever and had no beginning. 
 Ergo the force that moves them must be neither in their own physical structure nor in any external physical being. 
 It can only belong to some Being independent of all material things and indescribable by any predicate applicable to them.
When first reflecting on the world of generation and decay, Hayy had become aware that the substantiality of any material thing rests in its form, that is its propensity for certain types of motion. 
 Its being, on the material side, is defective at best, and in itself scarcely conceivable. 
 If so, the being of the whole universe is ultimately no more than its capacity to be moved by this great Mover, who is free of matter and all its attributes and transcends all that sense can perceive or imagination approach.