If He brings about the sidereal motions, each in its kind and all without discontinuity, never halting, never tiring, then He must know them all and hold absolute power over them
So this train of thought brought him exactly where the other had. 
 He was no longer troubled by the dilemmas of creation versus eternity, for either way the existence of a non-corporeal Author of the universe remained unscathed, a Being neither in contact with matter nor cut off from it, neither within nor outside it—for all these terms, ‘contact’ and ‘discontinuity’, inside’ and ‘outside’ are merely predicates of the very physical things which He transcends.
Since matter in every body demands a form, as it exists through its form and can have no reality apart from it, and since forms can be brought into being only by this Creator, all being, Hayy saw, is plainly dependent on Him for existence itself. 
 Nothing can subsist except through Him. 
 Thus He is the Cause of all things, and all are His effects, whether they came to be out of nothing or had no beginning in time and were in no way successors to non-being. 
 In either case they are His effects, dependent on Him for their existence, since He is their Cause and Maker. 
 If He did not endure, they would not endure. 
 If He did not exist, they would not exist. 
 If He were not eternal, they could not have been eternal. 
 But He, in Himself, has no need of them and is utterly independent of them.
How could this not be so, when it has been proved that His force and power are infinite, while all physical things and everything connected with them or in the least related to them are truncated and finite.
The whole Universe, then, and all that is in it—heaven and earth and all that lies above, beneath and between—is His work and creation, ontologically, if not temporally, posterior to Him.
Suppose you held something in your hand while moving your arm. 
 The object you held would undoubtedly move with your hand, subsequently not in time, but in fact—for in time the two motions are simultaneous. 
 It is in this way, out of time, that the universe is caused and created by its Maker \"Whose command, when He desires a thing is simply to tell it ‘Bel’ and it is.
The moment Hayy realized that all that exists is His work, he saw things in a new and different light. 
 It was as an expression of its Maker’s power that he saw each thing now, marveling at His wonderful craftsmanship, the elegance of His plan and ingenuity of His work. 
 In the least of things —not to speak of the greatest—Hayy found marks of wisdom and divine creativity that exhausted his powers of admiration and confirmed his belief that all this could issue only from a Cause of consummate perfection—beyond perfection! \"Not an atom’s weight escapes Him in heaven or on earth nor anything at all, greater or less.
Hayy considered how the Creator had given each sort of animal its makeup and showed how these were to be used — for if He did not teach animals to use their parts for their intended purposes, they would do the animals no more good than if they did not have them. 
 From this Hayy learned that He is most good and merciful.
From then on, whenever he saw a being that was good, or beautiful, or strong, or perfect in any way, he would recognize, on considering, that this must be its Maker’s work and stem from His overflowing abundance and liberality. 
 Thus he knew that what He Himself possesses must be greater and more perfect, fuller, better, and more lasting out of all proportion, than what He gives.
And so, continuing the sequence of perfections, Hayy saw that all belong to Him, proceed from Him, and are more truly predicated of Him than of any other being.
He surveyed the privations and saw that He is clear of them and transcends them all. 
 How could He not transcend privation when the very concept means no more than absolute or relative non-being—and how could non-being be associated or confused with Him Who is pure being, Whose essence is necessary existence, Who gives being to all that is? 
 There is no existence but Him. 
 He is being, perfection, and wholeness. 
 He is goodness, beauty, power, and knowledge. 
 He is He. 
 \"All things perish except His face.
By the end of his fifth seven-year span, his awareness had brought him to this point. 
 He was thirty-five.
By now thought of this Subject was so deeply rooted in his heart that he could think of nothing else. 
 He was distracted from his prior investigation of created being. 
 For now his eye fell on nothing without immediately detecting in it signs of His workmanship—then instantly his thoughts would shift from craft to Craftsman, deepening his love of Him, totally detaching his heart from the sensory world, and binding it to the world of mind.
Having gained an awareness of this eternally existing Being, Whose existence is uncaused, but Who is the cause of all existence, Hayy wished to know how this knowledge had come to him. 
 By what power had he apprehended such a being? 
 He counted off his senses—hearing, sight, smell, taste, and touch. 
 None of these could grasp anything but the physical or the attributes subsisting in it. 
 Hearing catches only sounds which are generated by the vibrating waves of air when bodies strike together. 
 Sight knows only colors; smell, odors; taste, flavors; touch, textures—hard or soft, rough or smooth. 
 Imagination too can apprehend only things with length, breadth, and depth.
All these are qualities predicable only of physical things. 
 Only these can be objects of the senses because the senses themselves are powers diffused in material things, and thus divisible with their substrates. 
 The senses, for this reason, can apprehend only divisible objects, that is physical things. 
 For these faculties are spread throughout a divisible thing and their object must be capable of a corresponding division. 
 Thus any faculty in a physical body can apprehend only physical bodies and their attributes.
But it was already quite clear to Hayy that this necessarily existent Being transcends physical attributes in every respect. 
 The only way to apprehend Him, then, must be by some non-physical means, something which is neither a bodily faculty nor in any way bound up with body—neither inside nor outside, neither in contact with it nor disjoined from it.
Hayy had also realized that what had brought him his awareness of this Being would be his true self, and now that his understanding of Him was better, he recognized that this self too, by which he had come to know Him, was non-corporeal and not qualifiable by any physical predicate. 
 The whole outward self, the objective, corporeal being he could perceive, was not his true self; his true identity was that by which he had apprehended the Necessarily Existent.
Knowing now that this embodiment, apprehended by the senses and enveloped in the skin was not himself, he thoroughly despised his body and set eagerly to thinking of that higher self by which he had reached an awareness of the sublime Being, Whose existence is necessary. 
 Was it possible that this other, nobler being, which was himself, could perish—or was it everlasting.
Disintegration and decay are, he knew, predicates of physical things indicating simply that they have taken off one form and put on another, as when water turns to air, or air to water, or when plants become soil or ashes, or soil becomes a plant. 
 This is the meaning of breakdown.
But the destruction of a nonphysical being which does not depend for its existence on anybody, and which completely transcends the physical, is utterly inconceivable.
Satisfied that his true self could not perish, he desired to know what its fate would be once it had freed itself of the body and left it behind. 
 Clearly this being would not abandon the body until no further use could be derived from it as a tool. 
 Hayy surveyed all his powers of perception and saw that each works actually at one time, potentially at another. 
 The eye, for example, when closed or averted from its object still sees potentially. 
 The meaning of ‘seeing potentially’ is that while it is not seeing now, it will in the future.
When open and turned toward its object, it actually sees. 
 ‘Seeing actually’ means seeing now.
The same holds for all these faculties, they all work either actually or potentially. 
 Any faculty of apprehension which at no time actually perceives but remains \"forever potential\", never desiring to grasp its appropriate object because that object has never been encountered by it, is like a man born blind. 
 If such a faculty actually does perceive for a time and then relapses into potentiality', but even in the potential state still yearns for actual perception, since it has known its proper object and grown fond of it, then it is like a sighted man gone blind who still longs for what he used to see.
The more beautiful, whole, or good the objects he once knew, the greater his longing for them and grief at their loss. 
 For this reason the sorrow of a man who has lost his sight is greater than that of one who has lost his sense of smell, for the objects of sight are higher and better than those of smell.
If there is a Being Whose perfection is infinite, Whose splendor and goodness know no bounds, Who is beyond perfection, goodness, and beauty, a Being such that no perfection, no goodness, no beauty, no splendor does not flow from Him, then to lose hold of such a Being, and having known Him to be unable to find Him must mean infinite torture as long as He is not found. 
 Likewise to preserve constant awareness of Him is to know joy without lapse, unending bliss, infinite rapture and delight.
Hayy had already realized that while He transcends all privations, every attribute of perfection can be applied to the Necessarily Existent.
He also knew that what in him had allowed him to apprehend this Being was unlike bodies and would not decay as they did. 
 From this he saw that, leaving the body at death, anyone with an identity like his own, capable of awareness such as he possessed, must undergo one of these three fates\" If, while in command of the body, he has not known the Necessarily Existent, never confronted Him or heard of Him, then on leaving the body he will neither long for this Being nor mourn His loss.
His bodily powers will go to ruin with the body, and thus make no more demands or miss the objects of their cravings now that they are gone.
This is the fate of all dumb animals— even those of human form.
If, while in charge of the body, he has encountered this Being and learned of His goodness but turned away to follow his own passions, until death overtook him in the midst of such a life, depriving him of the experience he has learned to long for, he will endure prolonged agony and infinite pain, either escaping the torture at last, after an immense struggle, to witness once again what he yearned for, or remaining forever in torment, depending on which direction he tended toward in his bodily life.
If he knows the Necessarily Existent before departing the body, and turns to Him with his whole being, fastens his thoughts on His goodness, beauty, and majesty, never turning away until death overtakes him, turned toward Him in the midst of actual experience, then on leaving the body, he will live on in infinite joy, bliss, and delight, happiness unbroken because his experience of the Necessarily Existent will be unbroken and no longer marred by the demands of the bodily powers for sensory things—which alongside this ecstasy are encumbrances, irritants and evils.
Seeing that self-realization and happiness meant constant actual experience of the Necessarily Existent, turning away not for an instant so that when death came it would find him rapt in ecstasy and the continuity of his delight would remain unbroken by pain, Hayy considered how he might maintain continuous, actual awareness without distraction.
He would concentrate on that Being for a time, but as soon as he did some sensory thing would present itself to view, some animal cry would split his ears, some image would dart across his mind, he would feel a pain somewhere, or get hungry or thirsty or hot or cold, or have to get up to relieve himself. 
 His thoughts would be disrupted, and he would lose what he had begun to reach. It was impossible for him to recapture the experience without tremendous effort; and he feared death might surprise him in a moment of distraction, leaving him to sink into the everlasting misery and torment of deprivation.
The malady was grave, and he did not know the cure.
Hayy went back over all the animal species, checking all their doings and strivings to see whether he might not find one that was aware of this Being and made Him its goal, to learn from it how to save himself.
But all animals, he saw, struggled day and night simply getting enough to eat, satisfying their appetites for food, water, mates, shade, and shelter, until their span of time was up and they died.
Not one could be seen to diverge from the pattern or ever strive toward anything else. 
 Apparently, then, none of them was aware of this Being, desired Him, or had any notion of Him. All of them would turn to nothing, or next to nothing.
Having judged this to be true of animals, Hayy recognized that it would be all the more so with plants, which have only a fraction of the avenues of perception open to animals.
If animals whose apprehension is the better and more complete, are incapable of reaching this level of consciousness, then beings whose perception is stunted are all the further removed from such an attainment. 
 After all, the whole of plant functioning goes no further than nutrition and reproduction.
He looked to the stars and spheres then, seeing how all circled in an ordered array of rhythmic motion. 
 They were diaphanous and luminous, far above all change and decay, and he made a strong surmise that they too had identities apart from their bodies, identities which knew this necessarily existent being and were neither physical nor imprints on anything physical. 
 How could they not have such identities, free of all that is bodily, when, with all his weakness, his desperate dependence on sensory things, and despite the fact that he lived among decaying bodies, even he had such a self.
His inadequacy did not prevent his true being from standing independent of all physical things and incorruptible. 
 Clearly the heavenly bodies must be all the more so. 
 Thus Hayy knew that they would know the Necessarily Existent and that their awareness of Him would be continuously actual since they are not subject to such hindrances as the sensory distractions that interrupted his own contemplation.
He asked himself then why he of all living beings should be singled out to possess an identity that made him very like the stars.
He had seen how the elements changed into one another. 
 Nothing on the face of the earth kept the same form. 
 All was in a constant alternation of build-up and breakdown. 
 Most bodies were mixtures, compounded of conflicting things, and so all the more prone to degeneration. 
 No physical thing was pure, although those which came closest to untainted purity, such as gold and sapphire, lasted longest. 
 The heavenly bodies were pure and uncompounded, and for this reason not subject to a succession of forms, and virtually beyond destruction.
Hayy had learned, moreover, that of bodies in the world of generation and decay some, namely the four elements, were made up of just one form besides physicality, while others, such as plants and animals, comprised more than one additional form.
Those with the fewest forms to compose their reality showed the least activity and were at the furthest remove from life. 
 If form were absent completely, life was totally impossible; the result was something very like non-being.
Beings composed of a greater number of forms showed more activity and a closer approach to life. 
 When form became inseparable from matter, then life was present at its strongest, stablest, and most unmistakable.
What has no form at all is hyle, matter. 
 It is not in the least alive, but next to non-existent. 
 Composed with just one form are the four elements, occupying the lowest ontic rungs in the world of generation and decay. 
 From these are compounded things with more than one form.
The elements have a very weak claim on life, not only because each has only one mode of motion, but also because each has an opposite working directly against it, tending to cancel its effects and eradicate its form.
For this reason its existence is unstable and its \"life\" tenuous. 
 The purchase of plants on life is stronger, however; and animals are plainly more alive than they.
The reason is that in ordinary compounds the nature of one element predominates. 
 Its strength in the composite overwhelms the other elements and destroys their capacities to function. 
 Such a compound passes under the sway of the prevailing element and thus becomes unsuited for life to any but a trivial degree—just as that element alone makes a negligible bid for life.
In those compounds, however, which are not dominated by the nature of one element, where the elements are mutually tempered and counterbalanced (and for this reason one element does not wipe out the effective force of its opposite to any greater degree than its own power of action is checked by the other), each element’s potential will do its work on the other to just the right extent, allowing the activity of one to show up no plainer than that of any other. 
 No one element will take over the whole, so the whole will bear little resemblance to any of them. 
 Its form, then, will have virtually no direct opposite—thus it will be ideally suited for life.
The stronger and stabler the equilibrium, the harder it is to find any opposite to work against it and the fuller its share in life.
Since the vital spirit situated in the heart is securely balanced in such an equilibrium, being finer than earth or water, but denser than fire or air, it is a middle so to speak, and no one element is in direct conflict with it. 
 This fits it well for life. 
 The implication Hayy drew from this was that the vital spirit with the stablest equilibrium would be fit for the highest form of life to be found in the world of generation and decay. 
 The form of such a spirit could virtually be said to have no opposite. 
 In this it would resemble the heavenly bodies, the forms of which have none at all. 
 The spirit of such an animal, being truly at a mean among the elements, would have absolutely no tendency up or down. 
 In fact, if it could be set in space, between the center and the outermost limit of fire, without being destroyed, it would stabilize there, neither rising nor falling.
If it moved in place, it would orbit like the stars, and if it moved in position it would spin on its axis. Its shape could only be spherical. 
 Thus it would bear a strong resemblance to the heavenly bodies.
Hayy had considered all phases of animal life and found none that gave him reason to suspect it was aware of the Necessarily Existent. 
 But his own consciousness informed him that it was aware of Him. 
 He was sure, for this reason, that he himself was the ideally balanced animal, kindred spirit of the celestial bodies. 
 Apparently, he was a species set apart from all other animal species, created for a different end than all the rest, dedicated to a great task which no animal could undertake. 
 Sufficient to establish his superiority was the fact that even his lower, bodily half bore the closest resemblance to those heavenly star substances that lived beyond the world of generation and decay, far beyond all change and want.
As for his nobler part, it was by this that he knew the Necessarily Existent Being. This conscious part was something sovereign, divine, unchanging and untouched by decay, indescribable in physical terms, invisible to both sense and imagination, unknowable through any instrument but itself, yet self-discovered, at once the knower, the known and knowing, the subject and object of consciousness, and consciousness itself. 
 There is no distinction among the three, for distinction and disjunction apply to bodies. 
 But here there is no body and physical predicates and relations do not apply.
Seeing that what made him different from all other animals made him like the heavenly bodies, Hayy judged that this implied an obligation on his part to take them as his pattern, imitate their action and do all he could to be like them.
By the same token, Hayy saw that his nobler part, by which he knew the Necessarily Existent, bore some resemblance to Him as well. 
 For like Him it transcended the physical.
Thus another obligation was to endeavor, in whatever way possible, to attain His attributes, to imitate His ways, and remold his character to His, diligently execute His will, surrender all to Him, accept in his heart His every judgement outwardly and inwardly. 
 Even when He caused harm or pain to his body, even if He destroyed it completely, he must rejoice in His rule.
He recognized, however, that he was like the lesser animals in his lower half, the body, for it belonged to the world of generation and decay. 
 It was dull and dark and demanded sensory things of him—food, drink, intercourse.
Still he knew that this body had not been created for him idly. 
 It had not been linked with him for nothing. 
 He must care for and preserve it, even though in so doing he would do no more than any animal.
His duties, then, seemed to fall under three heads, those in which he would resemble an inarticulate animal, those in which he would resemble a celestial body, and those in which he would resemble the Necessarily Existent Being.
He had to act like an animal to the extent that he had a dull, sublunary body with differentiated parts and conflicting powers and drives.
He had an obligation to imitate the stars in virtue of the vital spirit in his heart, which was command point for the rest of the body and all its powers.
It was his obligation to become like the Necessarily Existent because he was (and to the extent that he was) himself, that is to the extent of his identity with that self which brought him his awareness of the Necessarily Existent Being.
Hayy had learned that his ultimate happiness and triumph over misery would be won only if he could make his awareness of the Necessarily Existent so continuous that nothing could distract him from it for an instant.
He had wondered how this might be achieved and now came to the conclusion that the means would be to practice these three forms of mimesis. 
 The first would by no means give him this ecstasy. 
 On the contrary, it would hinder the experience and distract him from it, since it meant handling sensory things, and all sense objects are veils blocking out such experience. 
 This type of imitating was needed only to preserve the vital spirit, by which he might accomplish the second sort of assimilation, that by which he would become like the heavenly bodies.
Thus the first type was a necessity despite its inherent drawbacks.
His second type of imitation, however, did bring a large measure of continuity to his contemplation. 
 Still the experience was not altogether untainted, for at this level of experience, one remains self-conscious and self-regarding, as will be made clear shortly.
The third sort of imitation is attainment of the pure beatific experience, submersion, concentration on Him alone Whose existence is necessary. 
 In this experience the self vanishes; it is extinguished, obliterated—and so are all other subjectivities.
All that remains is the One, True identity, the Necessarily Existent—glory, exaltation, and honor to Him.
Hayy knew that his supreme goal was this third form of mimesis; but this would not be his without a long stint of training and self-discipline through the second, and this itself would not hold up for long if he neglected the first. 
 He knew also that serving his first likeness, although necessary and per accidens helpful, would hamper his true self. 
 So he made himself a rule to impose on himself no more of this first form of imitation than was necessary to keep the vital spirit on the brink of survival.
Necessity called for two things to preserve this spirit\" one to sustain it from within and replace what broke down, that is food; and the other to protect if from without and keep off various sorts of harm such as heat and cold, rain, too much sun, and harmful animals.
If he heedlessly allowed himself these necessities when and where he found them, he might well go too far and take more than he needed. 
 Without his realizing it, his efforts might work against him. 
 The prudent thing, Hayy saw, would be to set himself a limit he would not overstep. 
 There would be certain fixed quantities he would not surpass.
He must make rules about what to eat, how much, and how often.
He first considered what to eat. 
 There seemed to be three sorts of food\" plants that had not yet reached peak maturity, that is various edible green vegetables; fruits of plants that had completed their life cycles and were ready to produce a new generation, comprising fresh and dried fruit; and animals, terrestrial and marine.
All these he was certain were the work of that Necessarily Existent Being, whom he must endeavor to be like, as he now saw clearly, if he were to attain happiness.
Feeding on them would unavoidably cut them off from their own fulfillment and prevent them all from achieving their intended purpose.
This would mean opposition to the work of the Creator and defeat the whole aim of drawing near Him and becoming like Him.
The answer, apparently, was, if possible, to give up eating completely. 
 Unfortunately he could not do so because not eating tended to make his own body waste away, which was even more glaring a contradiction to the work of his Creator, since he was superior to those other beings whose destruction meant his survival.
So Hayy chose the lesser of evils. 
 He was forced to condone in himself the slighter form of opposition to His work. 
 He decided that if some varieties of food were unavailable, he would take whatever came most readily to hand in a quantity he would set.
But if all were available, then he would have to decide carefully what to eat so as to bring about the least opposition to the work of the Creator. 
 Thus he could eat such things as the meat of fully ripened fruits, with seeds ready to reproduce, provided he was certain not to eat or harm the seeds or throw them in places unfit for vegetation—among rocks or in salt flats or the like.
If it was hard to find fruit with nourishing meat, such as apples, plums, and pears, then he would have to eat either fruits in which only the seed had food-value, such as nuts and chestnuts, or else green vegetables—on condition that he pick only the most abundant and prolific and be sure not to uproot them or destroy the seeds.
If none of these were available, then he must eat meat or eggs, again being careful to take only from the most abundant and not root out a whole species.
So much for his notion of what he should eat.
As for the amount, he felt it should be enough to stave off hunger, but no more.
For the time to be allowed between meals, he considered he should eat what he needed and then look for no more until he began to feel too weak to carry out some of the tasks imposed on him by his second mode of imitation, which will be spoken of in a moment.
In terms of protection, the requirements for keeping alive the vital spirit were easily taken care of. 
 He wore skins and had a house to guard against any incursion of the environment. 
 This was enough for him. 
 He did not consider it worth his while to spend a great deal of time on it. 
 He did keep the dietary rules he’d made for himself, which I have described.