Having secured the needs of his body, inside and out, Hayy took up his second duty, to become like the celestial bodies, to do as they did, and model himself on their attributes. 
 Their properties, in his judgement, fell into three classes.
First, their attributes in relation to the world of generation and decay below, giving warmth essentially, and per accidens cooling, radiation of light, thickening and thinning and all the other things they do to prepare the world for the outpouring of spirit-forms upon it from the Necessarily Existent Creator.
Second, the properties they had in and of themselves, transparency, luminescence, purity from all taint, and transcendence of all tarnish, their circular motion, whether on their own axis or around some other center.
Third, their attributes in relation to the Necessarily Existent, their continuous, undistracted awareness of Him, their longing for Him, their total submission to His rule and devoted execution of His will, moving only at His pleasure and always in the clasp of His hand.
Hayy exerted every effort to be like them in these three ways.
For the first, he imitated their action by never allowing himself to see any plant or animal hurt, sick, encumbered, or in need without helping it if he could.
If he noticed a plant cut off from the sun, he would, if possible, remove what was screening it. 
 If he saw one plant tangled in another that might harm it, he would separate the two so carefully that not even the weed was damaged. 
 If he saw a plant dying for lack of water, he would water it as often as he could.
When he saw an animal attacked by a predator, caught in a tangle, or stuck by a thorn, or with anything harmful in its eye or ear, or under pressure of hunger or thirst, Hayy did all he could to alleviate the situation and gave it food and water.
Chancing to see an animal or plant’s water-supply cut off by a fallen rock or a fragment swept away from the overhanging riverbank, he would always clear away the obstacle.
He kept up his practice at this particular variety of imitation until he reached peak proficiency.
To be like the heavenly bodies in the second respect, Hayy made sure always to be clean, washing frequently with water, getting all the dirt and grime off his body, cleaning his teeth, nails, and every nook and cranny of his body—even scenting it as best as he could with plant fragrances and various pleasant smelling oils. He took great care to see that his clothes were always clean and fragrant, and soon he did begin to sparkle with vitality, cleanliness, and beauty 
 To be like the heavenly bodies in the second respect, Hayy made sure always to be clean, washing frequently with water, getting all the dirt and grime off his body, cleaning his teeth, nails, and every nook and cranny of his body—even scenting it as best as he could with plant fragrances and various pleasant smelling oils. 
 He took great care to see that his clothes were always clean and fragrant, and soon he did begin to sparkle with vitality, cleanliness, and beauty.
In addition, Hayy prescribed himself circular motion of various kinds. 
 Sometimes he would circle the island, skirting along the beach and roving in the inlets. 
 Sometimes he would march around his house or certain large rocks a set number of times, either walking or at a trot. 
 Or at times he would spin around in circles until he got dizzy.
His method of becoming like the heavenly bodies in the third respect was to fix his mind on the Necessarily Existent Being, cut away the bonds of all objects of the senses—shut his eyes, stop his ears, use all the force at his command to restrain the play of imagination—and try with all his might to think only of Him, without idolatrously mixing any other thought with the thought of Him. 
 Often he would aid himself by spinning around faster and faster.
If he spun fast enough, all sensory things would vanish; imagination itself, and every other faculty dependent on bodily organs would fade, and the action of his true self, which transcended the body, would grow more powerful. 
 In this way sometimes his mind would be cleansed, and through it he would see the Necessarily Existent—until the bodily powers rushed back, disrupting his ecstasy, and reducing him once more to the lowest of the low. 
 Then he would start over again.
When he became so weak that he could no longer work toward his goal, he would take a little nourishment, always following his rules, and return to his three ways of imitating the celestial bodies.
Tirelessly he battled against the drives of his body—and they fought back.
But when for a moment he had the upper hand and rid his mind of tarnish, he would see with a flash what it was like to reach this third type of likeness to the stars.
He then began to explore in the endeavor to achieve the third type of imitation. 
 He considered the attributes of the Necessarily Existent.
Already at the purely intellectual stage, before taking up active practice, Hayy had learned that these attributes are of one of two kinds\" either positive, like knowledge, power, and wisdom, or negative, like transcendence of the physical and all that even remotely pertains to it.
This transcendence implies that the list of positive attributes can include no attribute proper to physical things—as is plurality. 
 Thus His positive attributes do not render His identity plural, but all must reduce to one principle, which is His real self.
Hayy then took up the task of becoming like Him in both these ways.
For the positive attributes, knowing they all reduced to His identity (since plurality, belonging to physical things, was totally out of place here) and thus realizing that His self-awareness was not distinct from Himself, but His identity was Self-consciousness and His Self-knowledge was Himself, Hayy understood that if he himself could learn to know Him, then his knowledge of Him too would not be distinct from His essence, but would be identical with Him.
Thus Hayy learned that to become like Him in His positive attributes is simply to know Him, without sacrilegiously associating anything physical with Him. 
 This he set out to do.
The negative qualities all reduced to transcendence of physicality. 
 So Hayy set about eliminating the physical in himself. 
 The exercises by which he approached some likeness to the heavenly bodies had already brought him quite a way in this direction.
Still, many vestiges remained\" For example, his circular motion, since ‘motion’ was a predicate appropriate only to physical objects. 
 His compassion and solicitude for animals and plants and his eagerness to remove anything that hampered them were themselves characteristic of the physical, since he would not have seen the objects of his concern in the first place without, using a corporeal faculty; and to help them too required use of his bodily powers.
So Hayy undertook to expel all this from himself, for none of these things was conducive to the ecstasy he now sought.
He would stay in his cave, sitting on the stone floor, head bent, eyes shut, oblivious to all objects of the senses and urges of the body, his thoughts and all his devotion focused on the Being Whose Existence is Necessity, alone and without rival. 
 When any alien thought sprang to his imagination, Hayy would resist it with all his might and drive it out of his mind. 
 He disciplined himself and practiced endurance until sometimes days could pass without his moving or eating.
And sometimes, in the midst of his struggles, all thoughts and memories would vanish—except self-consciousness. 
 Even when immersed in the beatific experience of the Necessarily Existent Truth, his own subjecthood would not disappear.
This tormented Hayy, for he knew it was a blot on the purity of the experience, division of his attention as if with some other God.
Hayy made a concerted effort to purge his awareness-of-the-Truth, die to himself. 
 At last it came. 
 From memory and mind all disappeared, \"heaven and earth and all that is between them,\" all forms of the spirit and powers of the body, even the disembodied powers that know the Truly Existent.
And with the rest vanished the identity that was himself. 
 Everything melted away, dissolved, \"scattered into fine dust.\" 
 All that remained was the One, the True Being, Whose existence is eternal, Who uttered words identical with himself\" \"Whose is the Kingdom on this day?
All that remained was the One, the True Being, Whose existence is eternal, Who uttered words identical with himself\" \"Whose is the Kingdom on this day? 
 God’s alone, One and Triumphant.
Hayy understood His words and \"heard\" the summons they made. 
 Not knowing how to speak did not prevent him from understanding.
Drowned in ecstasy, he witnessed \"what no eye has seen or ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive.
Now do not set your heart on a description of what has never been represented in a human heart. 
 For many things that are articulate in the heart cannot be described. 
 How then can I formularize something that cannot possibly be projected in the heart, belonging to a different world, a different order of being.
Nor by ‘heart’ do I mean only the physical heart or the spirit it encloses. 
 I mean also the form of that spirit which spreads its powers throughout the human body. 
 All three of these might be termed ‘heart’, but there is no way of articulating this experience in any of them, and only what is articulate can be expressed.
The ambition to put this into words is reaching for the impossible—like wanting to taste colors, expecting black as such to taste either sweet or sour.
Still I shall not leave you without some hint as to the wonders Hayy saw from this height, not by pounding on the gates of truth, but by coining symbols, for there is no way of finding out what truly occurs at this plateau of experience besides reaching it.
So listen now with the ears of your heart and look sharp with the eyes of your mind, for what I shall try to convey to you. 
 Perhaps in what I say you will find guideposts to set you on the main road.
My only condition is that you now demand of me no further explanation of this experience than I set down in these pages. 
 For it is dangerous to make pronouncements on the ineffable, and the margins in which I work are narrow.
To continue, Hayy had \"died\" to himself, and to every other self. 
 He had witnessed his vision and seen nothing in all existence but the ever living ONE. 
 Recovered now from his seemingly intoxicated ecstasy, he saw other things once more, and the notion came into his head that his identity was none other than that of the Truth. 
 His true self was the Truth. 
 What he had once supposed to be himself, as distinct from the Truth, was really nothing in itself, but was in reality in no way discrete from the Truth. 
 When sunlight falls on opaque bodies and becomes visible, it may bear some relation to the object it lights up, but it is never really anything other than sunlight.
When the body is gone, so is its light, but the sun’s light remains the same, not increased by the object’s absence or diminished by its presence.
If an object comes along capable of taking on this type of light, then it receives it; if no such object is present there is no reflecting and no occasion for it.
Hayy was confirmed in the notion by his awareness that the Truth, glorified and exalted be He, was not in any sense plural and that His Self-knowledge was Himself.
It seemed to him to follow that whoever gains consciousness of His essence wins that essence itself.
Hayy had attained His identity.
This identity could be reached only by Himself; indeed, this very Self-awareness was His identity.
If so, then Hayy must be identical with Him, and so must every disembodied being that knows Him. 
 These he had once seen as many; but now, in the light of this presumption, they seemed to merge into one entity.
This specious thinking might well have taken root in his soul, had not God in His mercy caught hold of him and guided him back to the truth. 
 He then realized that he would never have fallen prey to such a delusion unless some shadows of the physical or taint of sensory things still lurked within him. 
 For many’, ‘few’, and ‘one’; ‘singularity’ and ‘plurality’; ‘union’ and ‘discreteness’, are all predicates applicable only to physical things. 
 But those non-material beings who know the Truth, glorified and exalted be He, precisely because they are free of matter, need not be said to be either one or many. 
 The reason is that there is multiplicity only when there is otherness and unity only where there is contact.
Both of these make sense only for things that are compounded—and confounded—in matter.
Expression on this subject, however, is extremely difficult. 
 If you speak of the non-material beings in the plural, as I have, it suggests that they are many. But they are entirely free of plurality.
If, on the other hand, you use the singular, it suggests absolute unity, which is equally impossible for them.
What is this? 
 It seems to be a bat that interrupts me, its eyes blinded by the sun, baffled in the meshes of its own mad confusion, crying \"This time your hair-splitting has gone too far. 
 You have shed what the intelligent know by instinct and abandoned the rule of reason. 
 It is an axiom of reason that a thing must be either one or many!\" 
 Now if he could just calm himself and curb the rashness of his tongue—if he could only suspect himself and consider the vile, sensory world in which he lives, consider it as Hayy Ibn Yaqzan did, when from one point of view it seemed plural beyond number or term; and from another, a monolith.
Hayy could not decide one way or the other, but remained oscillating between the two descriptions.
Such a quandary over the sense world, the birthplace and proper home of whatever legitimate understanding is conveyed by ‘singular’ and ‘plural’, ‘discrete’ and ‘continuous’, ‘separate’ and ‘conjoined’, ‘identical’ and ‘other’, ‘same’ and ‘different’. 
 What then was Hayy to think of the divine world, where ‘whole’ and ‘part’ are inapplicable, a world indescribable without misrepresentation, which no one can know or fully understand without actually reaching it and seeing for himself.
He says I have \"left what every sound mind is born with and abandoned the rule of reason.\" 
 I shall grant him that. 
 I have left him and his reason and his \"sound minds.\" 
 What he means by reason—he and his ilk—is no more than the power to articulate, to abstract a general concept from a number of sensory particulars, and his \"men of sound reason\" are simply those whose minds work the same way.
But the kind of understanding I am speaking of transcends all this. 
 The man who knows only sense particulars and universal drawn from them had better stop up his ears and go back to his friends, who \"know only the surface of this life and are heedless of the next.
Still, if in your case a hint and a glimpse will be enough to give you some idea of the divine world, and if you can avoid construing my words in their ordinary senses, then I can tell you a bit more of what Hayy Ibn Yaqzan saw in his ecstasy. 
 Passing through a deep trance to the complete death-of-self and real contact with the divine, he saw a being corresponding to the highest sphere, beyond which there is no body, a subject free of matter, and neither identical with the Truth and the One nor with the sphere itself, nor distinct from either—as the form of the sun appearing in a polished mirror is neither sun nor mirror, and yet distinct from neither.
The splendor, perfection, and beauty he saw in the essence of that sphere were too magnificent to be described and too delicate to be clothed in written or spoken words. 
 But he saw it to be at the pinnacle of joy, delight, and rapture, in blissful vision of the being of the Truth, glorious be His Majesty.
Just below this, at the sphere of the fixed stars, Hayy saw another non-material being. 
 This again was neither identical with the Truth and the One, nor with the highest sphere, nor even with itself, yet distinct from none of these. 
 It was like the form of the sun appearing in one mirror, reflected from a second which faced the sun.
Here too were glory, beauty, and joy as in the highest.
Lying just below he saw the identity of the sphere of Saturn, again divorced from matter and neither the same as nor different from the beings he had seen—as it were, the reflection of the reflection of the reflection of the sun; and here too he saw splendor and rapture as before.
Thus for each sphere he witnessed a transcendent immaterial subject, neither identical with nor distinct from those above, like the form of the sun reflected from mirror to mirror with the descending order of spheres.
In each one Hayy sensed goodness, beauty, joy, and bliss that \"no eye has seen, or ear heard, nor has it entered the heart of man to conceive,\" until finally he reached the world of generation and decay, the bowels of the sphere of the moon. 
 Here too was an essence free of matter, not one with those he had seen—but none other.
Only this being had seventy thousand faces. 
 In every face were seventy thousand mouths; in every mouth, seventy thousand tongues, with which it ceaselessly praised, glorified, and sanctified the being of the One who is the Truth.
In this being, which he took to be many although it is not, Hayy saw joy and perfection as before.
It was as though the form of the sun were shining in rippling water from the last mirror in the sequence, reflected down the series from the first, which faced directly into the sun.
Suddenly he caught sight of himself as an unembodied subject. 
 If it were permissible to single out individuals from the identity of die seventy thousand faces, I would say that he was one of them.
Were it not that his being was created originally, I would say that they were he.
And had this self of his not been individuated by a body on its creation I would have said that it had not come to be.
From this height he saw other selves like his own, that had belonged to bodies which had come to be and perished, or to bodies with which they still coexisted. 
 There were so many (if one may speak of them as many) that they reached infinity. 
 Or, if one may call them one, then all were one.
In himself and in the other beings of his rank, Hayy saw goodness, beauty, joy without end, the like of which eyes cannot see, ears hear, or human hearts conceive, ineffable, known only by the aware, who arrive.
He saw also many disembodied identities, more like tarnished mirrors, covered with rust, their faces averted and their backs to the brilliant mirrors in which shone the image of the sun.
They were ugly, defective, and deformed beyond his imagining. 
 In unending throes of torture and ineradicable agony, imprisoned in a pavilion of torment, scorched by the flaming partition, they were tossed about like chaff by pitchforks, now frantically scattered, now huddled together in fear.
Besides these tortured beings he saw others which had once been tightly knit and shone brightly, but had now dimmed and grown loose and ravelled. 
 Hayy scrutinized these, studied them well. 
 He saw a terrible sight, vast ruination, skittering creatures and a grave sentence, the fashioning of man and the raising up of creation, the outflow of the breath of life and its eradication.
Little by little he pulled himself together. 
 His senses came back. He regained consciousness from what seemed to have been a faint and lost his foothold on that plane of experience. 
 As the world of the senses loomed back into view, the divine world vanished, for the two cannot be joined in one state of being- like two wives\" if you make one happy, you make the other miserable.
You may object, \"Your treatment of his experience shows that if these non-material identities belong to eternal, indestructible bodies like the spheres, they too will endure forever. 
 But what if they belong to bodies subject to decay, such as that of the rational animal? 
 Then they too ought to perish. 
 By your own analogy of the reflecting mirrors, the image has permanence only so long as there is a mirror. 
 If the mirror is ruined, then the image is obliterated.\" 
 I can only reply, it certainly did not take you long to forget our bargain and break my conditions.
Did I not just tell you how narrow my scope for expression is here and warn you that my words would make a false impression in any case. 
 Your misapprehension is due solely to your confusing my symbol with what it represents. 
 You expect a one-for-one correspondence.
Such literalism is not tolerable with ordinary figures of speech, and it is all the less tolerable in this special context. 
 The sun, its light, its form and image, the mirrors and the forms reflected in them are all inseparable from physical bodies, unable to subsist without them, thus dependent on them for existence itself, and of course destroyed when they are destroyed.
But these divine, sovereign spirits all utterly transcend the physical and everything dependent on it. 
 There is no tie of any kind between the two.
To these beings, whether bodies endure or perish, whether they exist or not, is all the same. 
 Their sole bond is to the One, the Truth, the Necessarily Existent, Who is the first of them, their origin and cause, the ground of their existence, Who gives them being, allows them to endure and even to be eternal. 
 They have no need of bodies. On the contrary, all bodies depend on them.
If they could conceivably go out of existence, then all material objects would go with them, for all physical things originate from them. 
 In the same way, assuming the Truth Himself were to become non-existent—sanctified be He and exalted above all such thoughts! 
 —then not one of these essences would exist, no physical things, no sense world, nothing! 
 For all things are bound one to the next.
Yet even though the sense world mimics the divine like a shadow, and the divine world is self-sufficient and totally independent, still it is impossible to postulate complete nonexistence for the sensory world, for the very reason that it does reflect the world of the divine. 
 The destruction of the world, then, can mean only that it is transformed, not that it goes out of existence altogether. 
 The Holy Book speaks clearly to this effect in describing how the mountains will be set in motion and become like tufts of wool, and men like moths, the sun and moon cast down, the seas split open and spilled out, on the Day when the earth turns to what is no longer earth, and the heavens to what is no longer heaven.
These hints and no more I am able to relate concerning what Hayy Ibn Yaqzan witnessed at this lofty plane. 
 Do not ask me to add anything more in words. 
 That would be next to impossible.
But I will tell you the rest of the story. 
 Returned to the world of the senses from his wandering, Hayy grew weary of the cares of this world and longed still more for that other life. 
 He tried to return as before, and found he could reach this higher level more easily and remain longer.
He returned to the sense world and set out again, finding he could reach this station still more easily and stay still longer.
Again and again he returned to that sublime state, more and more easily, more and more sustainedly, until he reached the point that he could attain it whenever he wished and remain as long as he liked. 
 He would stay riveted to his station, turning away only to attend the needs of his body, which had by now so wasted away that a more meagre figure could scarcely be found.
All the while, Hayy longed that God—glory to Him—would ease him altogether of his body, which constantly called him away from his post, and let him enjoy bliss untrammelled and undisrupted, free of the painful need of leaving his vantage point to tend to the body.