In this fashion Hayy lived until he had passed his seventh septenary and reached the age of fifty.
It was then he chanced to make the acquaintance of Absal. 
 God willing, I shall tell you the tale of their friendship.
Near the island where, according to one of the two conflicting accounts of his origin, Hayy was born, there was, so they say, a second island, in which had settled the followers of a certain true religion, based on the teachings of a certain ancient prophet-God’s blessing on all such prophets.
Now the practice in this religion was to represent all reality in symbols, providing concrete images of things and impressing their outlines on the people's souls, just as orators do when addressing a multitude. 
 The sect spread widely throughout the island, ultimately growing so powerful and prominent that the king himself converted to it and made the people embrace it as well.
There had grown up on this island two fine young men of ability and high principle, one named Absal and the other Salaman. 
 Both had taken instruction in this religion and accepted it enthusiastically. 
 Both held themselves duty- bound to abide by all its laws and precepts for living.
They practiced their religion together; and together, from time to time, they would study some of that religion’s traditional expressions describing God—exalted be He—the angels He sends, and the character of resurrection, reward and punishment.
Absal, for his part, was the more deeply concerned with getting down to the heart of things, the more eager to discover spiritual values, and the more ready to attempt a more or less allegorical interpretation.
Salaman, on the other hand, was more anxious to preserve the literal and less prone to seek subtle intensions. 
 On the whole he avoided giving too free rein to his thoughts.
Still each of them executed the express commands of the text fastidiously, kept watch over his soul, and fought his passions.
In the Law were certain statements proposing a life of solitude and isolation and suggesting that by these means salvation and spiritual triumph could be won. 
 Other statements, however, favored life in a community and involvement in society.
Absal devoted himself to the quest for solitude, preferring the words of the Law in its favor because he was naturally a thoughtful man, fond of contemplation and of probing for the deeper meanings of things; and he did find the most propitious time for seeking what he hoped for to be when he was alone.
But Salaman preferred being among people and gave greater weight to the sayings of the Law in favor of society, since he was by nature chary of too much independent thinking or doing.
In staying with the group he saw some means of fending off demonic promptings, dispelling distracting thoughts, and in general guarding against the goadings of the devil.
Their differences on this point became the cause of their parting.
For Absal had heard of the island where it is said Hayy came to be. 
 He knew how temperate, fruitful and hospitable it was and how easy it would be, for anyone who so desired, to live there in solitude. 
 So he decided to go there and remain in isolation for the rest of his life.
He took what money he had, and with some hired a boat to take him to the island. 
 The rest he divided among the poor; and, saying goodbye to his friend, he set sail. 
 The sailors brought him to the island, set him down on the beach and left.
Absal remained there on the island, worshipping, magnifying, and sanctifying God—glory to Him—contemplating His most beautiful names and sublime attributes. 
 His reveries were undisrupted; his thoughts, unsullied.
When he needed food, he would take some of the island fruits or game, just enough to hold his appetite in check.
He lived in this way for some time in most perfect happiness and intimacy with his Lord.
Each day he could see for himself God’s splendid gifts and acts of grace—the ease with which He allowed him to find not just his food but all his wants, confirming his trust and putting a sparkle in his eye.
All this while Hayy Ibn Yaqzan was deeply immersed in his supernal ecstasies, emerging from his cave no more than once a week for whatever food came to hand. 
 For this reason, Absal did not come across him at first, but surveyed the whole island without seeing a soul or even a footprint— which made him all the happier, since his intention had been to be alone.
But once, when Hayy had come out to look for food, Absal happened to be nearby and they saw each other.
Absal had no doubt that this was another anchorite who had come to the island, as he had, in search of solitude.
He was anxious not to disturb the other by introducing himself, for fear of disrupting his frame of mind and preventing his attaining the goal he would be hoping to reach.
Hayy, for his part, had not the least idea what Absal was, since he had the form of no animal he had ever laid eyes on.
Besides, he was wearing a long, black cloak of wool and goat hair, which Hayy took to be his natural coat.
Hayy simply stood gazing at him in amazement; but Absal, still hoping not to distract him, took to his heels and ran. 
 Always naturally eager to find out about things, Hayy set out after him.
But, seeing Absal run still faster, he fell back and dropped out of sight, letting Absal suppose he had lost the trail and gone elsewhere.
Absal then took up his devotions and was soon completely absorbed in invocations, recitations, weeping, and lamentations.
Little by little Hayy crept up without Absal’s noticing, until he was in earshot of his praises and recitations and could make out how he was humbling himself and weeping. 
 The voice he heard was pleasant and the sounds somehow clearly patterned, quite unlike the call of any animal he had ever heard before.
On closer inspection of the other’s features and the lines of his body, Hayy recognized the form as his own and realized that the long coat was not a natural skin, but simply a garment intended for use like his own.
Seeing how abject Absal made himself, Hayy had no doubt that he was one of those beings who know the Truth. 
 He felt drawn to him, and wanted to know what was wrong, what was it that made him cry. 
 He approached closer and closer, but Absal caught sight of him and fled. 
 Hayy ran after him, and with the power and vigor God had given him, not just mentally, but physically as well, he caught up with him and seized him in a grip from which he could not escape.
When he got a good look at his captor, clothed in hides still bristling with fur, his hair so overgrown that it hung down over a good part of his body, when he saw how fast he could run and how fiercely he could grapple, Absal was terrified and began to beg for mercy. 
 Hayy could not understand a word he said. 
 But he could make out the signs of fright and did his best to put the other at ease with a variety of animal cries he knew. 
 Hayy also patted his head, rubbed his sides, and spoke soothingly to him, trying to show how delighted he was with him.
Eventually Absal’s trepidation died down and he realized that Hayy did not mean him any harm.
Years before, in his passion for the study of the more sophisticated level of interpretation, Absal had studied and gained fluency in many languages, so he tried to speak to Hayy, asking him about himself in every language he knew. 
 But Absal was completely unable to make himself understood. 
 Hayy was astounded by this performance, but had no idea what it might mean—unless it was a sign of friendliness and high spirits. 
 Neither of them knew what to make of the other.
Absal had a little food left over from the provisions he had brought from the civilized island. 
 He offered it to Hayy, but Hayy did not know what it was. 
 He had never seen anything like it.
Absal ate a bit and made signs to Hayy that he should eat some too. 
 But Hayy was thinking of his dietary rules. 
 Not knowing what the proffered food might be or what it was made from, he had no idea whether he was allowed to eat it or not, so he would not take any.
Absal, however, kept trying to interest him in it, in an effort to win him over.
And Hayy, liking him and afraid to hurt his feelings by persistently refusing, took the food and ate some.
The moment he tasted how good it was, Hayy knew he had done wrong to violate his pledged dietary restrictions. 
 He regretted what he had done and wanted to get away from Absal and devote himself to his true purpose, a return to sublimity. 
 But this time ecstasy would not come so readily. 
 It seemed best to remain in the sense-world with Absal until he had found out so much about him that he no longer felt any interest in him. 
 Then he would be able to go back to his station without further distraction. 
 So he sought out Absal’s company.
When Absal, for his part, saw that Hayy did not know how to talk, the fears he had felt of harm to his faith were eased, and he became eager to teach him to speak, hoping to impart knowledge and religion to him, and by so doing earn God’s favor and a greater reward.
So Absal began teaching him to talk, at first by pointing at some basic objects and pronouncing their names over and over, making him pronounce them too and pronounce them while pointing, until he had taught him nouns. 
 Then he progressed with him, little by little and step by step, until in no time Hayy could speak.
Absal then plied him with questions about himself and how he had come to the island. 
 Hayy informed him that he had no idea of his origins. 
 He knew of no father or any mother besides the doe that had raised him. 
 He told all about his life and the growth of his awareness, culminating in contact with the divine.
Hearing Hayy’s description of the beings which are divorced from the sense-world and conscious of the Truth—glory be to Him—his description of the Truth Himself, by all His lovely attributes, and his description, as best he could, of the joys of those who reach Him and the agonies of those veiled from Him, Absal had no doubt that all the traditions of his religion about God, His angels, bibles and prophets, Judgement Day, Heaven and Hell were symbolic representations of these things that Hayy Ibn Yaqzan had seen for himself. 
 The eyes of his heart were unclosed. 
 His mind caught fire. 
 Reason and tradition were at one within him. 
 All the paths of exegesis lay open before him. 
 All his old religious puzzlings were solved; all the obscurities, clear. 
 Now he had \"a heart to understand.
Absal looked on Hayy Ibn Yaqzan with newfound reverence. 
 Here, surely, was a man of God, one of those who \"know neither fear nor sorrow.
He wanted to serve as his disciple, follow his example and accept his direction in those things which in Absal’s own view corresponded to the religious practices he had learned in his society.
Hayy then asked him about himself and his life; and Absal, accordingly, set out to tell him about his island and the people who lived there. 
 He described how they had lived before the advent of their present religion and how they acted now.
He related all the religious traditions describing the divine world, Heaven and Hell, rebirth and resurrection, the gathering and reckoning, the scales of justice and the strait way.
Hayy understood all this and found none of it in contradiction with what he had seen for himself from his supernal vantage point.
He recognized that whoever had offered this description had given a faithful picture and spoken truly. 
 This man must have been a \"messenger sent by his Lord.\" 
 Hayy believed in this messenger and the truth of what he said. 
 He bore witness to his mission as apostle of God.
What obligations and acts of worship had he prescribed, Hayy asked. 
 Absal described prayer, poor tax, fasting, and pilgrimage, and other such outward practices. 
 Hayy accepted these and undertook to observe them. 
 He held himself responsible to practice these things in obedience to the command of one whose truthfulness he could not doubt.
Still there were two things that surprised him and the wisdom of which he could not see. 
 First, why did this prophet rely for the most part on symbols to portray the divine world, allowing mankind to fall into the grave error of conceiving the Truth corporeally and ascribing to Him things which He transcends and is totally free of (and similarly with reward and punishment) instead of simply revealing the truth.
Second, why did he confine himself to these particular rituals and duties and allow the amassing of wealth and overindulgence in eating, leaving men idle to busy themselves with inane pastimes and neglect the Truth.
Hayy’s own idea was that no one should eat the least bit more than would keep him on the brink of survival. 
 Property meant nothing to him, and when he saw all the provisions of the Law to do with money, such as the regulations regarding the collection and distribution of welfare or those regulating sales and interest, with all their statutory and discretionary penalties, he was dumbfounded. All this seemed superfluous.
When the boy saw her in such a state, he was beside himself with grief. 
 His soul seemed to overflow with sorrow.
If people understood things as they really are, Hayy said, they would forget these inanities and seek the Truth. 
 They would not need all these laws. 
 No one would have any property of his own to be demanded as charity or for which human beings might struggle and risk amputation.
What made him think so was his naive belief that all men had outstanding character, brilliant minds and resolute spirits. 
 He had no idea how stupid, inadequate, thoughtless, and weak willed they are, \"like sheep gone astray, only worse.
Hayy deeply pitied mankind and hoped that it might be through him that they would be saved. 
 He was eager to go to these men to reveal and explain the Truth. 
 He spoke about it with his friend Absal, asking if he knew any way of reaching them. 
 Absal warned him how defective they are in character and how heedless of God’s Word, but this was not easy for Hayy to understand. 
 His heart was set on what he hoped to accomplish.
Absal himself had hopes that through Hayy God might give guidance to a body of aspiring acquaintances of his, who were somewhat closer to salvation than the rest. 
 He agreed to help with the idea. 
 The two men decided to stay by the shore day and night, in hopes that God might give them some ready means of crossing over. 
 And so they stayed, humbly praying God to fortify them with sound judgment.
By God’s command it happened that a ship lost its course and was driven by the winds and the beating of the waves to their shore.
When it came close to land the men on board saw two men on the beach, so they rode in closer and Absal hailed them and asked if they would take them along. 
 The men answered yes and brought them on board. 
 No sooner had they done so than God sent a favorable wind that brought the ship with all possible speed to the island where the two had hoped to go. 
 They debarked and went up to the city.
Absal’s friends gathered, and he told them all about Hayy Ibn Yaqzan. 
 They all marvelled at the story. 
 They crowded around him, making much of him, and in fact deeply in awe of him.
Absal informed Hayy that of all men this group approached nearest to intelligence and understanding. 
 If Hayy were unable to teach them, it would be all the more impossible for him to teach the masses.
The ruler of the island and its most eminent man at this time was Salaman, Absal’s friend who believed in living within society and held it unlawful to withdraw. 
 Hayy Ibn Yaqzan began to teach this group and explain some of his profound wisdom to them.
But the moment he rose the slightest bit above the literal or began to portray things against which they were prejudiced, they recoiled in horror from his ideas and closed their minds. 
 Out of courtesy to the stranger and in deference to their friend Absal, they made a show of being pleased with Hayy, but in their hearts they resented him.
Hayy found them delightful and continued his exposition of the truth, exoteric and esoteric, night and day. 
 But the more he taught, the more repugnance they felt, despite the fact that these were men who loved the good and sincerely yearned for the Truth. 
 Their inborn infirmity simply would not allow them to seek Him as Hayy did, to grasp the true essence of His being and see Him in His own terms. 
 They wanted to know Him in some human way. 
 In the end Hayy despaired of helping them and gave up his hopes that they would accept his teaching.
Then, class by class, he studied mankind. 
 He saw \"every faction delighted with its own.\" 
 They had made their passions their god, and desire the object of their worship. 
 They destroyed each other to collect the trash of this world, \"distracted by greed ’til they went down to their graves.\" 
 Preaching is no help, fine words have no effect on them. 
 Arguing only makes them more pig-headed.
Wisdom, they have no means of reaching; they were allotted no share of it. 
 They are engulfed in ignorance. 
 Their hearts are corroded by their possessions. 
 God has sealed their hearts and shrouded their eyes and ears. 
 Theirs will be an awesome punishment.
When he saw that the torture pavilion already encircled them and the shadows of the veil already enshrouded them, when he saw that all but a very few of them adhered to their religion only for the sake of this world and \"flung away works, no matter how light and easy, sold them for a bad price\", distracted from the thought of God by business, heedless of the Day when hearts and eyes will be turned inwards, Hayy saw clearly and definitely that to appeal to them publicly and openly was impossible. 
 Any attempt to impose a higher task on them was bound to fail. 
 The sole benefit most people could derive from religion was for this world, in that it helped them lead decent lives without others encroaching on what belonged to them. 
 Hayy now knew that only a very few win the true happiness of the man who \"desires the world to come, strives for it and is faithful.
\" But \"for the insolent who prefer this life— Hell will be their refuge.
What weariness is heavier, what misery more overburdening than recounting all you do from the time you get up to the time you go to bed without finding a single action that did not amount to seeking one of these vile, sensory aims\" money making, pleasure seeking, satisfying some lust, venting rage, saving face, performing religious rites for the sake of honor, or just to save your neck! All these are only \"cloud upon cloud over a deep sea.\" 
 \"Not one among you will not descend there—this from your Lord, decreed and sealed.
Hayy now understood the human condition. 
 He saw that most men are no better than unreasoning animals, and realized that all wisdom and guidance, all that could possibly help them was contained already in the words of the prophets and the religious traditions. 
 None of this could be different. 
 There was nothing to be added. 
 There is a man for every task and everyone belongs to the life for which he was created. 
 \"This was God’s way with those who came before, and never will you find a change in the ways of God.
But what I’ve been looking for all along is something uniquely related to this special position and something I know I could not live without for the batting of an eye.
Hayy wondered what he himself might be, stripped of all the functions which seemed at first glance to emanate from himself, and realized that he was no more than another body. 
 These thoughts, then, brought him to the conclusion that all bodies —whether they are animate or inanimate—are one thing, although some exhibit certain special functions, which they implement by organs. 
 But he did not know whether these activities were strictly speaking their own or had come from something else.
Carried away by his amazement, and by the courage, not to say audacity, God had compounded with his nature, Hayy reached out and tried to grasp a piece of it. 
 But when he touched it it burnt his hand, and he could not hold on to it. 
 Then he got the idea of taking a brand that was not wholly on fire. 
 He picked it up by the end that wasn’t burning, leaving the fire at the other end. 
 This he could manage with ease, so he took it home—for he had moved into a cave, which seemed to him a fine place to live.
Boldly taking hold of the eagle, Hayy cut off the wings and tail just as they were, all in one piece. 
 He stretched out the wings and smoothed down the feathers, stripped off the remaining skin and split it in half, tying it about his middle, hanging down, half in front and half behind. 
 The tail, he threw across his back; and he fastened the wings to his arms. 
 Thus he got a fine covering that not only kept him warm but also so terrified the animals that not one of them would fight with him or get in his way.
I decided to afford them a fleeting glimpse of the mystery of mysteries to draw them to true understanding and turn them away from this other, false way. 
 Nonetheless I have not left the secrets set down in these few pages entirely without a veil—a sheer one, easily pierced by those fit to do so, but capable of growing so thick to those unworthy of passing beyond that they will never breach it.
So Hayy went to Salaman and his friends and apologized, dissociating himself from what he had said. 
 He told them that he had seen the light and realized that they were right. 
 He urged them to hold fast to their observance of all the statutes regulating outward behavior and not delve into things that did not concern them, submissively to accept all the most problematical elements of the tradition and shun originality and innovation, follow in the footsteps of their righteous forbears and leave behind everything modern.
He cautioned them most emphatically not to neglect religion or pursue the world as the vast majority of people do.
Hayy Ibn Yaqzan and his friend Absal now knew that even this aspiring group fell short and could be saved only in their own way. 
 If ever they were to venture beyond their present level to the vantage point of insight, what they had would be shattered, and even so they would be unable to reach the level of the blessed. 
 They would waver and slip and their end would be all the worse.
But if they went along as they were until overtaken by death, they would win salvation and come to sit on the right. 
 But \"those who run in the forefront, those who run in the forefront, they will be brought near.
So, saying goodbye to them, the two left their company and discreetly sought passage back to their own island. Soon God—exalted be He—gave them an easy crossing.
Hayy searched for his ecstasy as he had before, until once again it came. 
 Absal imitated him until he approached the same heights, or nearly so. Thus, they served God on the island until man’s certain fate overtook them.
And this—may God give you spirit to strengthen you—is the story of Hayy Ibn Yaqzan, Absal and Salaman. 
 It takes up a line of discourse not found in books or heard in the usual sort of speeches. 
 It belongs to a hidden branch of study received only by those who are aware of God and unknown to those who know Him not.
In treating of this openly I have broken the precedent of our righteous ancestors, who were sparing to the point of tightfistedness in speaking of it.
What made it easy for me to strip off the veil of secrecy and divulge this mystery was the great number of corrupt ideas that have sprouted up and are being openly spread by the self-styled philosophers of today, so widely that they have covered the land and caused universal damage. 
 Fearing that the weak-minded, who throw over the authority of prophets to ape the ways of fools, might mistake these notions for the esoteric doctrines which must be kept secret from those unfit to know them, and thus be all the more enticed to embrace them.
Of my brothers who read these words I ask indulgence for my loose exposition and lack of rigor in demonstration. 
 My only excuse is that I had risen to pinnacles higher than the eye can see, and I wanted to try, at least, to approach them in words so as to excite desire and inspire a passion to start out along this road.
Of God I ask forgiveness, and pray Him to purify our knowledge of Him, for He is bountiful and it is He Who bestows all blessings.
Farewell my brother, whom it was my duty to help. 
 The blessings and the mercy of God upon you.