Suppose you produced a sermon on abstinence and claimed it as the work of a pious ascetic like Bakr ibn ‘Abdullah Muzani, ‘Amir ibn ‘Abd Qays ‘Anbari, Mu‘ariq ‘Ijli or Yazid Raqqashi, its appeal would then be doubled. 
 The attribution alone would acquire for your work a brilliance and esteem it might otherwise lack.
But attribute it to a dissolute like Abu Ka‘b Soufi, ‘Abd al-Mu’min, the poet Abu Nuwas or Hussayn the Debauched and the sermon would have no more than whatever intrinsic merit it might possess. 
 Your miscalculation would most likely lower its appeal.
I have included many stories where the characters are named and many where they are not - out of respect in some cases and out of fear in others.
Abu’l Aswad Du’ali20 was a clever, wise, learned and resourceful man who would never have countenanced this new-fangled generosity of yours. 
 \"If the Lord extends His blessing unto you,\" he told his son, \"extend yourself accordingly and if things get tight then exercise restraint. 
 Do not try to compete against God’s generosity, for He is infinitely more generous.
\"Anywhere I have been,\" remarked Thumama,23 \"I’ve always seen the roosters pick up grain in their beaks and drop it in front of the hens - except in Marw. 
 There, I watched the roosters snatching grain from the hens’ beaks.
Friends told me about a group of Khurasanis travelling together who put up for the night at an inn. 
 They did without a lamp for as long as possible then joined forces and split the cost of the oil among themselves. 
 One man, however, refused to pay his share.
It is said that when Marwis travel together (and, of course, they will either be on foot or riding two to a donkey), they all club together to buy the meat, which is divided into shares before being cooked. 
 Each man then threads a string or strip of palm leaf through his own piece and puts it in the pot to cook, along with the vinegar and spices.
The strings are then collected for later re-use should this communal effort be repeated, since they are now thoroughly soaked through with grease.
Also, they need only one pot. 
 Marwis like to cook with vinegar because the meat lasts for days before going bad.
Abu Ishaq borrowed one from another neighbour but when he heard the sizzling of meat in the pan, the Khurasani was indignant.
\"You astonish me! I’d have been round with one like a shot if you’d told me you wanted it for frying meatballs. 
 I was afraid you wanted it for beans. 
 You see, the surface of a frying pan bums if there’s no fat in what you’re frying.
He was a clean living, pious man, incorruptible and meticulous who never allowed personal feelings to sway his judgement. 
 His avarice was no less meticulous - he was a scraping, penny-pinching old skinflint who only ate and drank when he absolutely had to.
If he saw the gardener, he slipped him a dirham and told him to buy this or that - ripe dates if in season, or grapes if it was that time of year. 
 \"Now, I’m not looking for any favours but be sure to pick only the best for me. If you don’t, I won’t eat it and I’ll never come back here again.
And watch you don’t cheat me! 
 The victim of deceit gets no thanks from the cheat nor does the Lord reward him. 
 \" When the gardener returned, the sheikh finished his meal and ate whatever the gardener had brought. 
 He then picked his teeth, washed his hands, walked one hundred paces, lay down on his side and fell asleep until it was time for the midday prayer.
Then he woke up, washed and walked over to the mosque.
Sajjada (z'.e. Abu Sa‘id Sajjada) said that during the six months of the year when the weather is so bad that they have to wear boots, the men of Marw walk on tiptoe for the first three months and on heel for the next three - so it’s as if they have only had their boots on for three months. Why? Because they are afraid of getting holes in the soles.
\"She married off her daughter when the girl was twelve, dressing her in silver and gold jewellery, satin and silk and a gown of embroidered Marwi cloth. 
 She hung the walls with saffron-yellow drapes and prepared her own incense and perfume. 
 This greatly enhanced her status with her own family as well as in the eyes of the in-laws.
’‘Leave out the generalities and let’s have the detail! 
 You never had any money before and you’ve not come into an inheritance of late. 
 You are not dishonest and you don’t pinch from me. 
 Perhaps it’s treasure you’ve discovered.
‘God has been your guiding hand and given you a judgement truly sound! ’ 
 exclaimed her husband. 
 ‘And He has blessed and graced the man who is your confidant and partner.
in the year \"of the Hijrah\" 201, while studying at the feet of Hisham ibn-al-Kalbi, he received the following\" Hisham ibn-Muhammad al-Kalbi said\" I was informed by my father and others, and I personally checked and ascertained their report, that when Ishmael, the son of Abraham, settled in Mecca, he begot many children. 
 \"Their descendants\" multiplied so much that they crowded the city and supplanted its original inhabitants, the Amalekites. 
 Later on Mecca became overcrowded with them, and dissension and strife arose among them, causing them to fight among themselves and consequently be dispersed throughout the land where they roamed seeking a livelihood.
Abu-al-Mundhir Hishim ibn-Muhammad said\" Al-Kalbi related on the authority of ahu-Sahlih who, in turn, related on the authority of ibn-’Abbas, that Isif and Ni’ilah (a man from the Jurhum called Isif ibn-Ya’la and \"a woman called\" Ni’ilah, the daughter of Zayd, another Jurhumite) \"were two lovers). 
 Isif was courting Na’ilah in the land of Yemen. 
 They set out to perform the pilgrimage. 
 Upon their arrival in Mecca they entered the Ka’bah. 
 Taking advantage of the absence of anyone else and of the privacy of the Sacred House, Isaf committed adultery with her in the sanctuary. 
 Thereupon they were transformed into stone, becoming two miskhs. 
 They were then taken out and placed in their respective places. 
 Later on, the Khuza’ah and the Quraysh, as well as everyone who came on pilgrimage to the Sacred House, worshipped them.
These, then, are the five idols which the people of Noah used to worship. 
 For this reason God mentioned them in His Book, which He revealed to His Prophet, \"Said Noah, ‘O Lord! they rebel against me, and they follow those whose riches and children do but aggravate their ruin.’ 
 And they plotted a great plot; and they said, ‘Forsake not your gods; Forsake not Wadd and Suwa, nor Yaghuth and Ya’uq and Nasr.’ 
 And they caused many to err; and thou, too, shalt be the means of increasing only error in the wicked.
They did not, however, hold the same regard, or anything approaching it, for the five idols which were introduced by ‘Amr ibn-Luhayy. 
 These are the five idols which God mentioned in the glorious Koran when He said, \"Forsake not Wadd nor Suwa’, nor Yaghuth and Ya’us and Nasr.\"
This, I believe, was because of their distance from them.
Whenever the lineage of a new-born was doubted, they would offer a sacrifice to it \"Hubal\" and then shuffle the arrows and throw them. 
 If the arrows showed the word \"pure,\" the child would be declared legitimate and the tribe would accept him. 
 If, however, the arrows showed the words \"consociated alien,\" the child would be declared illegitimate and the tribe would reject him.
The third arrow was for divination concerning the dead, while the fourth was for divination concerning marriage. 
 The purpose of the three remaining arrows has not been explained.
Whenever they disagreed concerning something, or purposed to embark upon a journey, or undertake some project, they would proceed to it \"Hubal\" and shuffle the divination arrows before it. 
 Whatever result they obtained they would follow and do accordingly.
When, on the day he conquered Mecca, the Apostle of God appeared before the Ka’bah, he found the idols arrayed around it. 
 Thereupon he started to pierce their eyes with the point of his arrow saying, \"Truth is come and falsehood is vanished. 
 Verily, falsehood is a thing that vanisheth.\" 
 He then ordered that they be knocked down, after which they were taken out and burned.
The Arabs were passionately fond of worshipping idols. 
 Some of them took unto themselves a temple around which they centered their worship, while others adopted an idol to which they offered their adoration. 
 The person who was unable to build himself a temple or adopt an idol would erect a stone in front of the Sacred House or in front of any other temple which he might prefer, and then circumambulate it in the same manner in which he would circumambulate the Sacred House. 
 The Arabs called these stones baetyls (ansab(.
Once upon a time a certain man \"belonging to one of these tribes\" came to it with his flock of camels in order to make them stand on it and thereby obtain its blessing. 
 But as he led them near the rock they shied away from it because it was covered with blood, and they scattered in every direction. 
 Thereupon the man became furious, and picked up a stone and threw it at the rock saying, \"Accursed god! 
 Thou hast caused my camels to shy.
I was told by abu-’Ali al-’Anazi on the authority of ‘Ali ibn-al-Sabbah that abu-al-Mundhir Hisham ibn-Muham- mad ibn-al-Sa’ih al-Kalbi related to him that his father once told him that what had given rise to the worship of idols was the following\" When Adam died the children of Seth (Shith), the son of Adam, buried him in a cave in the whereon Adam alighted (when he was sent) to the land of India.
(The name of the mountain is Nawdh, and it is the most fertile mountain in all the world.
Hence the saying, \"More fertile than Nawdh and more arid than Barahut. 
 Barahut is a valley in Hadra-mawt, in \"the Vicinity of\" a village called Tin’ah.
I was told by al-Hasan ibn-’Ulayl on the authority of ‘Ali ibn-al-Sabbah that abu-al-Mundhir related on the authority of his father the following\" Wadd, Suwaf, Yaghuth, Ya’uq, and Nasr were righteous people who died within one month of one another, and their relatives were grief-stricken over them.
Then One of the children of Cain addressed their relatives saying, \"O ye who are bereaved! 
 Shall I make unto you five statues after the image of your departed relatives’? 
 I can readily, although I cannot impart life to them.\"
Thereupon he carved unto them five statues after the image of \"their departed relatives\", and erected them \"over their graves.
Another century followed during which people venerated and respected those statues more than they did during the first century.
Then a third century followed, and the people said, \"Our forefathers venerated these statues for no other reason than the desire to enjoy their intercession before God.\"
Consequently they worshipped them, and became far game in disbelief.
Thereupon God sent unto them the Prophet Idris, who is Enoch (Akhnukh) the son of Jared the son of Mahaleel the son of Cainan. 
 Idris called upon the people to repent and warned them, but they believed him not and hearkened not unto his voice. 
 Therefore God \"uplifted him to a place on high.
Wise men have said, \"Among the things a person owes his friend is to overlook his lapses and disregard his misdeeds. 
 If he corrects himself and satisfies you, \"well and good;\" otherwise, reprove him gently, for excessive reproof leads to alienation.
The same applies to the spiritual essences. Now, the power combining everything without any particularization is the divine power. 
 It is the power distributed over all existing things, whether they are universals or particulars, combining and comprising them in every aspect, with regard to appearance and hiddenness and with regard to form and matter. 
 Everything is one. 
 (Oneness) is identical with the divine essence. 
 In reality, (the divine essence) is one and simple. 
 The thing that divides it is the way (we) look at it. 
 For instance, as to the relationship of humanity to animality, it is clear that the former is included under the latter and comes into being when it comes into being.
At times, (the Sufis) represent the relationship as that of genus to species, (which exists) in every existing thing, as we have mentioned. 
 Or, they represent it as that of the universal to the particular, according to the theory of ideas (mithal.)
It appears from the discussion of Ibn Dihaq, who explains this (Sufi) theory, that what the (Sufis) say about oneness is actually similar to what the philosophers say about colors, namely, that their existence is predicated upon light. 
 When there is no light, no colors whatever exist.
Thus, the (Sufis) think that all existing sensibilia are predicated upon the existence of some (faculty of) sensual perception and, in fact, that all existing intelligibilia and objects of imagination are predicated upon the existence of some (faculty of) intellectual perception. 
 Thus, every particular in existence is predicated upon (the existence of) the human (faculty) that perceives it.
If we assumed that no human being with perception exists, there would be no particularization in existence. 
 Existence would be simple and one. 
 Thus, heat and cold, solidity and softness, and, indeed, earth, water, fire, heaven, and the stars, exist only because the senses perceiving them exist, because particularization that does not exist in existence is made possible for the (person) who perceives. 
 It exists only in perception. 
 If there were no perceptions to create distinctions, there would be no particularization, but just one single perception, namely, the \"I\" and nothing else.
They consider this comparable to the condition of a sleeper. 
 When he sleeps and has no external sense perception, he loses in that condition all (perception of) sensibilia, with the exception of the things that the imagination particularizes for him.
They continued by saying that a person who is awake likewise experiences particularized perceptions only through the type of human perception (that exists) in him. 
 If he had not that something in him that perceives, there would be no particularization. 
 This is what the (Sufis) mean when they say \"imaginary.\" 
 They do not mean \"imaginary\" as a part (in the sequence) of human perceptions.
This is a short exposition of (Sufi) opinion, as gathered from the discussion of Ibn Dihaq. 
 It is most erroneous. We know for certain that a country which we have quitted on our travels or to which we are traveling, exists, despite the fact that we do not see it any more. 
 We also have definite knowledge of the existence of heaven that overlooks (everything), and of the stars, and of all the other things that are remote from us.
Man knows these things for certain. 
 No one would deny to himself (the existence of) certain knowledge. 
 In addition, competent recent Sufis say that during the removal (of the veil), the Sufi novice often has a feeling of the oneness (of existence). 
 Sufis call that the station of \"combination\" (jam'). 
 But then, he progresses to distinguishing between existent things. 
 That is considered by the Sufis the station of \"differentiation\" (farq). 
 That is the station of the competent gnostic.
The recent Sufis who speak of the removal (of the veil) and supersensory perception have delved deeply into these (subjects). 
 Many of them turned to (the theory of) incarnation and oneness, as we have indicated. 
 They have filled many pages with (their exposition of) it. 
 That was done, for instance, by al-Harawi, in the Kitab al-Maqamat, and by others.
They were followed by Ibn al-'Arabi and Ibn Sab'in and their pupils, and then by Ibn al-'Afif ('Afif-ad-din), Ibn al-Farid, and Najm-ad-din al-Isra'ili, in the poems they composed.
The early (Sufis) had had contact with the Neo-Ismailiyah Shi'ah extremists who also believed in incarnation and the divinity of the imams, a theory not known to the early (Isma'iliyah). 
 Each group came to be imbued with the dogmas of the other.
Avicenna referred to this in the sections on Sufism in the Kitab al-Isharat. 
 He said\" \"The majestic Truth is too exalted to be available equally to all who seek it, or to be seen save by one person at a time.
The theory of (successive \"poles\") is not confirmed by logical arguments or evidence from the religious law. 
 It is a sort of rhetorical figure of speech. 
 It is identical with the theory of the extremist Shi'ah about the succession of the imams through inheritance. 
 Clearly, mysticism has plagiarized this idea from the extremist Shi'ah and come to believe in it.
The (Sufis), furthermore, speak about the order of existence of the \"saints\" who come after the \"pole,\" exactly as the Shi'ah speak about their \"chiefs.
Among the men around Muhammad, 'Ali was not distinguished by any particular practice or way of dressing or by any special condition.
Abu Bakr and 'Umar were the most ascetic and pious people after the Messenger of God.
Yet, none of these men was distinguished by the possession of any particular religious practice exclusively peculiar to him. 
 In fact, all the men around Muhammad were models of religion, austerity, asceticism, and (pious) exertion.
It is obvious that the Sufis in the 'Iraq derived their comparison between the manifest and the inner (world) from the Isma'iliyah Shi'ah and their well-known theory concerning the imamate and connected matters, at the time when the Isma'iliyah Shi'ah made its appearance. 
 The (Isma'iliyah Shi'ah) considered the leadership of mankind and its guidance toward the religious law a duty of the imam. 
 Therefore, they assumed that there could be no more than one imam if the possibility of a split were to be avoided, as is established in the religious law.
(Correspondingly, the Sufis) then regarded as a duty of the \"pole,\" who is the chief gnostic, the instruction (of mankind) in the gnosis of God. 
 Therefore, they assumed that there could be only one, on analogy from the imam in the manifest (world), and that he was the counterpart of the imam. 
 They called him \"pole,\" because the gnosis revolves around him, and they equated the \"saints\" with the 'Alid \"chiefs,\" in their exaggerated desire to identify (their concepts with those of the Shi'ah.
An instance of what I have just been saying is the lengthy discussion of the Fatimid in Sufi works. 
 The early Sufis made neither negative nor affirmative statements on the Fatimid. 
 The lengthy discussion of (recent) Sufis was derived from the discussion (of the subject) and the dogmas (concerning it) expressed by the extremist Shi'ah in their works.
There is no objection to a person's declaring the oneness of the Truth, while retaining the outlines and traces (of worldliness). 
 This belongs to the chapter (dealing with the fact) that the good actions of pious people may be the bad actions of persons who are close to the Divine.
It results from the lack of freedom, servitude, and doubleness (of the human condition.
For those who have ascended to the station of \"combination,\" it constitutes a defect. 
 They are conscious of their rank and know that (their imperfection) is a deception resulting from (human) servitude, that vision can eliminate it, and that the very essence of \"combination\" can cleanse them from the uncleanliness of their createdness.
If the concepts are known, there can be no quarrels about the words.
All this teaches realization of the fact that there is something above this level, something about which one cannot speak and about which there is no information.
This much of a hint is sufficient.
Going deeply into matters like this (lowers) the veil. 
 That is the gist of the wellknown (Sufi) statements.
Here ends the quotation from shaykh Abu Mahdi b. azZayyat.
As for their discussion of pious exertions and stations, of the mystical and ecstatic experiences that result, and of self-scrutiny with regard to (possible) shortcomings in the things that cause these (experiences), this is something that nobody ought to reject. 
 These mystical experiences of (the Sufis) are sound ones. 
 Their realization is the very essence of happiness.
As for their discussion of the acts of divine grace experienced by Sufis, the information they give about supernatural things, and their activity among the created things, these (also) are sound and cannot be.
disapproved of, even though some religious scholars tend to disapprove. 
 That is not right.
Professor Abu Ishaq alIsfarayini, a leading Ash'arite, argued that these things should be disapproved of, since they might be confused with the (prophetical) miracles. 
 However, competent orthodox scholars have made a distinction between (miracles and acts of divine grace) by referring to \"the (advance) challenge\" (tahaddi), that is, the claim (made by a prophet in advance) that the miracle would occur in agreement with the prophetic revelation.
It is not possible, they said, that a miracle could happen in agreement with the claim of a liar. 
 Logic requires that a miracle indicate truthfulness. 
 By definition, a (miracle is something that) can be verified.
Many such acts of divine grace were experienced by the men around Muhammad and the great early Muslims. 
 This is a well-known and famous (fact).
Most of the (Sufi) discussion of the removal (of the veil), of the reception of the realities of the higher things, and of the order in which the created things issue, falls, in a way, under the category of ambiguous statements. 
 It is based upon the intuitive experience of (Sufis), and those who lack such intuitive experience cannot have the mystical experience that the (Sufis receive from) it.
No language can express the things that (Sufis) want to say in this connection, because languages have been invented only for (the expression of) commonly accepted concepts, most of which apply to the sensibilia.
Therefore, we must not bother with the (Sufi) discussion of those matters. We ought merely to leave it alone, just as we leave alone the ambiguous statements (of the Qur'an and the Sunnah). 
 Those to whom God grants some understanding of those (mystical) utterances in a way that agrees with the plain meaning of the religious law do, indeed, enjoy happiness.
(Finally,) there are the suspect expressions which the Sufis call \"ecstatic utterances\" (shatahat) and which provoke the censure of orthodox Muslims. 
 As to them, it should be known that the attitude that would be fair to the (Sufis) is (to observe) that they are people who are removed from sense perception. 
 Inspiration grips them. 
 Eventually, they say things about their inspiration that they do not intend to say. 
 A person who is removed (from sense perception) cannot be spoken to. 
 He who is forced (to act) is excused (when he acts, no matter what he does.
(Sufis) who are known for their excellence and exemplary character are considered to act in good faith in this and similar respects. 
 It is difficult to express ecstatic experiences, because there are no conventional ways of expressing them. 
 This was the experience of Abu Yazid al-Bistami and others like him.
However, (Sufis) whose excellence is not known and famous deserve censure for utterances of this kind, since the (data) that might cause us to interpret their statements (so as to remove any suspicion attached to them) are not clear to us.
(Furthermore, any Sufis) who are not removed from sense perception and are not in the grip of a state when they make utterances of this kind, also deserve censure.
Therefore, the jurists and the great Sufis decided that al-Hallaj was to be killed, because he spoke (ecstatically) while not removed (from sense perception) but in control of his state.
And God knows better.
Whenever they had a (supernatural) experience, they turned away from it and paid no attention to it. 
 Indeed, they tried to avoid it. 
 They were of the opinion that it was an obstacle and a tribulation and belonged to the (ordinary) perceptions of the soul, and, as such, was something created.
They also thought that human perception could not comprise all the existentia and that the knowledge of God was wider, His creation greater, and His religious law more certain for guidance (than any mystical experience). 
 Therefore, they did not speak about any of their (supernatural) perceptions.
In fact, they forbade the discussion of those things and prevented their companions, for whom the veil (of sense perception) was removed, from discussing the matter or from giving it the slightest consideration. 
 They continued following their models and leading exemplary lives as they had done in the world of sensual perception before the removal (of the veil), and they commanded their companions to do the same.
This science belongs to the sciences of the religious law. 
 It originated in Islam when the sciences became crafts and scholars wrote books on them.
Dream visions and dream interpretation existed among the ancients, as among later generations.
It existed among former (pre-Islamic) religious groups and nations. 
 However, their dream interpretation did not reach us, because we have been satisfied with the discussions of Muslim dream interpreters.
In any case, all human beings can have dream visions, and these visions must be interpreted.
Truthful Joseph already interpreted visions, as is mentioned in the Qur'an.
(Sound tradition in) the Sahih, on the authority of the Prophet and on the authority of Abu Bakr, likewise establishes (the existence of dream visions). 
 Dream vision is a kind of supernatural perception.
The reason for perception of the supernatural in dream visions is as follows\" The spirit of the heart, which is the fine vapor coming from the cavity in the flesh of the heart, spreads into the veins and, through the blood, to all the rest of the body. 
 It serves to perfect the actions and sensations of the animal powers.
The (spirit) may be affected by lassitude, because it is very busy with the sensual perception of the five senses and with the employment of the external powers. 
 When the surface of the body, then, is covered by the chill of night, the spirit withdraws from all the other regions of the body to its center, the heart. 
 It rests, in order to be able to resume its activity, and all the external senses are (for the time being) unemployed. 
 This is the meaning of sleep, as was mentioned before at the beginning of the book.
Now, the spirit of the heart is the vehicle of man's rational spirit. 
 Through its essence, the rational spirit perceives everything that is in the divine world, since its reality and its essence are identical with perception.